558 SECTIOn Ix Special Topics (A) Measurement of plasma concentrations of the vitamin are also used. In Excess, Vitamin B6 Causes Sensory neuropathy The development of sensory neuropathy has been reported in patients taking 2 to 7 g of pyridoxine per day for a variety of reasons (there is some slight evidence that it is effective in treating premenstrual syndrome). There was some residual damage after withdrawal of these high doses; other reports suggest that intakes in excess of 100 to 200 mg/d are associ- ated with neurological damage. VITAMIN B12 IS FOUND ONLY IN FOODS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN The term “vitamin B12” is used as a generic descriptor for the cobalamins—those corrinoids (cobalt-containing com- pounds possessing the corrin ring) having the biologic activity of the vitamin (Figure 44–13). Some corrinoids that are growth factors for microorganisms not only have no vitamin B12 activ- ity, but may also be antimetabolites of the vitamin. Although it is synthesized exclusively by microorganisms, for practical purposes vitamin B12 is found only in foods of animal origin, there being no plant sources of this vitamin. This means that strict vegetarians (vegans) are at risk of developing B12 defi- ciency. The small amounts of the vitamin formed by bacteria on the surface of fruits may be adequate to meet requirements, O N N HOCH2 CH2 CH2 CH2 CH3 CH3 H3C H3C H3C H3C CH3 CH2CH2CONH2 CH2CH2CONH2 CH2CONH2 H2NCOCH2 H2NCOCH2 H2NCOCH2CH2 CH3 NH O O C H O O P O C CH3 H3C CH3 N N N R N Co+ HO FIGURE 44–13 Vitamin B12. Four coordination sites on the central cobalt atom are chelated by the nitrogen atoms of the corrin ring, and one by the nitrogen of the dimethylbenzimidazole nucle- otide. The sixth coordination site may be occupied by: CN− (cyano- cobalamin), OH− (hydroxocobalamin), H2O (aquocobalamin, —CH3 (methyl cobalamin), or 5′-deoxyadenosine (adenosylcobalamin). but preparations of vitamin B12 made by bacterial fermenta- tion are available. Vitamin B12 Absorption Requires Two Binding proteins Vitamin B12 is absorbed bound to intrinsic factor, a small glycoprotein secreted by the parietal cells of the gastric mucosa. Gastric acid and pepsin release the vitamin from protein bind- ing in food and make it available to bind to cobalophilin, a binding protein secreted in the saliva. In the duodenum, coba- lophilin is hydrolyzed, releasing the vitamin for binding to intrinsic factor. Pancreatic insufficiency can therefore be a factor in the development of vitamin B12 deficiency, resulting in the excretion of cobalophilin-bound vitamin B12. Intrinsic factor binds only the active vitamin B12 vitamers and not other corrinoids. Vitamin B12 is absorbed from the distal third of the ileum via receptors that bind the intrinsic factor-vitamin B12 complex, but not free intrinsic factor or free vitamin. There is considerable enterohepatic circulation of vitamin B12, with excretion in the bile, then reabsorption after binding to intrinsic factor in the ileum. There Are Two Vitamin B12–Dependent Enzymes Methylmalonyl CoA mutase, and methionine synthase (Figure 44–14) are vitamin B12-dependent enzymes. Methylmalonyl CoA is formed as an intermediate in the catabolism of valine and by the carboxylation of propionyl CoA arising in the catabolism of isoleucine, cholesterol, and rare fatty acids with an odd number of carbon atoms, or directly from propionate, a major product of microbial fermentation in the rumen. It undergoes a vitamin B12- dependent rearrangement to succinyl CoA, catalyzed by meth- ylmalonyl CoA mutase (see Figure 19–2). The activity of this enzyme is greatly reduced in vitamin B12 deficiency, leading to an accumulation of methylmalonyl CoA and urinary excretion of methylmalonic acid, which provides a means of assessing vitamin B12 nutritional status. Methionine synthase H C NH Methionine COO– (CH2)2 H3C S Homocysteine 3+ H C NH COO– (CH2)2 SH 3 Methylcobalamin Methyl + B12 H4 folate H4 folate FIGURE 44–14 homocysteine and the “folate trap. Vitamin B12 deficiency leads to impairment of methionine synthase, resulting in accumulation of homocysteine and trapping folate as methyltetrahy- drofolate. Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library