908 SECTION 15 | Respiratory Disorders • Nonprescription inhaled epinephrine as Primatene Mist metered-dose inhaler is less effective than prescription SABAs and is only to be used for temporary relief of mild symptoms of intermittent asthma in patients ≥12 years old; patients should see a physician immediately if improvement is not seen within 20 minutes, symptoms Treatment Intermittent Asthma Management of Persistent Asthma in Individuals Ages 12+ Years STEP 1 STEP 2 STEP 3 STEP 4 STEP 5 STEP 6d Preferred PRN SABA Daily low-dose ICS and PRN SABA or PRN concomitant ICS and SABAa Daily and PRN combination low-dose ICS- formoterola Daily and PRN combination medium-dose ICS-formoterola Daily medium-high dose ICS-LABA + LAMA and PRN SABAa Daily high-dose ICS-LABA + oral systemic corticosteroids + PRN SABA Alternative Daily LTRAb and PRN SABA or Cromolyn,b or Nedocromil,b or Zileuton,b or Theophylline,b and PRN SABA Daily medium- dose ICS and PRN SABA or Daily low-dose ICS-LABA, or daily low-dose ICS + LAMA,a or daily low-dose ICS + LTRA,b and PRN SABA or Daily low-dose ICS + Theophyllineb or Zileuton,b and PRN SABA Daily medium- dose ICS-LABA or daily medium-dose ICS + LAMA, and PRN SABAa or Daily medium- dose ICS + LTRA,b or daily medium- dose ICS + Theophylline,b or daily medium-dose ICS + Zileuton,b and PRN SABA Daily medium-high dose ICS-LABA or daily high-dose ICS + LTRA,b and PRN SABA Steps 2–4: Conditionally recommend the use of subcutaneous immunotherapy as an adjunct treatment to standard pharmacotherapy in individuals ≥ 5 years of age whose asthma is controlled at the initiation, build up, and maintenance phases of immunotherapya Consider adding Asthma Biologics (e.g., anti-IgE, anti-IL5, anti-IL5R, anti-IL4/IL13)c Assess Control • First check adherence, inhaler technique, environmental factors,a and comorbid conditions. • Step up if needed; reassess in 2–6 weeks • Step down if possible (if asthma is well controlled for at least 3 consecutive months) Consult with asthma specialist if Step 4 or higher is required. Consider consultation at Step 3. Control assessment is a key element of asthma care. This involves both impairment and risk. Use of objective measures, self-reported control, and health care utilization are complementary and should be employed on an ongoing basis, depending on the individual’s clinical situation. FIGURE 79-1. Stepwise approach for management of asthma in ages 12 years and older. ICS, inhaled corticosteroids; LABA, long-acting β2-agonist; LAMA, long- acting muscarinic antagonist; LTRA, leukotriene receptor antagonist; SABA, inhaled short-acting β2-agonist. aUpdated based on the 2020 guidelines. bCromolyn, nedo- cromil, LTRAs including zileuton and montelukast, and theophylline were not con- sidered for this update and/or have limited availability for use in the United States, and/or have an increased risk of adverse consequences and need for monitoring that makes their use less desirable. The FDA issued a Boxed Warning for montelu- kast in March 2020. cThe AHRQ systematic reviews that informed this report did not include studies that examined the role of asthma biologics (eg, anti-IgE, anti-IL5, anti-IL5R, anti-IL4/IL13). Thus this report does not contain specific recommenda- tions for the use of biologics in asthma in Steps 5 and 6. dData on the use of LAMA therapy in individuals with severe persistent asthma (Step 6) were not included in the AHRQ systematic review and thus no recommendation is made.