99 Heart Failure | CHAPTER 9 • Fluid overload can result in pulmonary congestion and peripheral edema. • Nonspecific symptoms may include fatigue, nocturia, hemoptysis, abdominal pain, anorexia, nausea, bloating, ascites, poor appetite or early satiety, and weight gain or loss. • Physical examination may reveal pulmonary crackles, S3 gallop, cool extremities, Cheyne–Stokes respiration, tachycardia, narrow pulse pressure, cardiomegaly, symp- toms of pulmonary edema (extreme breathlessness and anxiety, sometimes with coughing and pink, frothy sputum), peripheral edema, jugular venous distention (JVD), hepatojugular reflux (HJR), hepatomegaly, and mental status changes. DIAGNOSIS • Consider the diagnosis of HF in patients with characteristic signs and symptoms. A complete history and physical examination with appropriate laboratory testing are essential in evaluating patients with suspected HF. • Laboratory tests for identifying disorders that may cause or worsen HF include com- plete blood cell count; serum electrolytes (including calcium and magnesium); renal, hepatic, thyroid function tests, and iron studies; urinalysis; lipid profile; and A1C. Hyponatremia (serum sodium <130 mEq/L [mmol/L]) may indicate worsening volume overload and/or disease progression and is associated with reduced survival. Serum creatinine may be increased due to hypoperfusion; preexisting renal dysfunc- tion can contribute to volume overload. B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) is typically >35 pg/mL (ng/L; 10 pmol/L) for ambulatory patients and >100 pg/mL (ng/L; 29 pmol/L) for patients hospitalized or with decompensated HF. NT -proBNP is usually >125 pg/mL (ng/L; 15 pmol/L) for ambulatory patients and >300 pg/mL (ng/L; 35 pmol/L) for patients hospitalized or with decompensated HF. • Ventricular hypertrophy can be demonstrated on chest radiograph or electrocardio- gram (ECG). Chest radiograph may also show pleural effusions or pulmonary edema. • Echocardiogram can identify abnormalities of the pericardium, myocardium, or heart valves and quantify LVEF to determine if systolic or diastolic dysfunction is present. • The New York Heart Association Functional Classification System is intended primarily to classify symptoms according to the physician’s subjective evaluation. Functional class (FC)-I patients have no limitation of physical activity, FC-II patients have slight limitation, FC-III patients have marked limitation, and FC-IV patients are unable to carry on physical activity without discomfort. TREATMENT OF CHRONIC HEART FAILURE • Goals of Treatment: Improve quality of life, relieve or reduce symptoms, prevent or minimize hospitalizations, slow disease progression, and prolong survival. GENERAL APPROACH • The first step is to determine the classification of HF based on LVEF and symptoms based on NYHA functional class and any precipitating factors. Treatment of underly- ing disorders (eg, hyperthyroidism) may obviate the need for treating HF. • An international group developed a staging system to emphasize that HF is a con- tinuum and includes risk factor modification and preventive strategies. • Stage A (at risk for HF): Patients with no HF signs or symptoms and no structural or biomarker evidence of HF but who are at risk for developing HF because of the presence of risk factors. Identify and modify risk factors to prevent development of structural heart disease and subsequent HF. Strategies include smoking cessation and control of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) are recommended for HF prevention in select patients with ASCVD or diabetes. Consider sodium- glucose cotransporter type 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors in patients with diabetes because they reduce the risks of adverse cardiovascular events and hospitalization for HF.