Hypoglycaemia 197 and high C-peptide can be seen in sulphonylurea or meglitinide administration, and a urine or plasma drug screen is thus important. Autoantibodies positive to the insulin receptor or insulin may also evoke hypoglycaemia, such as AIS. If a sulphonylurea drug screen and an insulin autoantibody screen are negative, raised plasma insulin and C-peptide concentrations are suggestive of an insulinoma. Some tumours release proinsulin, which can also be assayed. Imaging will also be necessary, such as magnetic resonance imaging or computerized tomography scanning, to localize the tumour and to help exclude MEN syndrome (see Chapter 24). If both the plasma insulin and C-peptide concentrations are suppressed, the hypoglycaemia (hypoinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia) can then be divided into non-ketotic and ketotic forms. Hypoglycaemia with low plasma ketone concentrations, that is, b-hydroxybutyrate less than 600 µmol/L, is suggestive of increased insulin or IGF-1 activity such as may occur in non-islet cell tumour hypoglycaemia (NICTH). In NICTH, there is often increased IGF-2 secretion. Some spindle cell tumours, for example of the thorax, may release a variant ‘big-IGF-2’ resulting in hypoglycaemia (Doege–Potter syndrome). Hypoinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia with hypoketonaemia can also be seen in hepatic failure or renal disease. Therefore liver and renal function should be checked. Conversely, hypoinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia with high plasma ketones, that is, b-hydroxybutyrate more than 600 µmol/L, can be found in hypopituitarism (see Chapter 7) when the plasma GH concentration is usually low. In addition, consider adrenal insufﬁ ciency (see Chapter 8) and hypothyroidism (see Chapter 11), in which plasma GH is usually high. High alcohol intake can also present with hypoinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia and raised ketone concentrations. However, more commonly, the patient has been referred for investigation of previously documented hypoglycaemia or with a history strongly suggestive of hypoglycaemic attacks. It is also essential to exclude adrenal insufﬁ ciency, especially in diabetes mellitus patients with unexplained hypoglycaemia or reduced insulin requirements. If no cause is identiﬁ ed at this point, it may be possible to induce hypoglycaemia by provocation tests, although these are not without the risk of severe hypoglycaemic episodes. Such tests could be as follows: ● Overnight fast A majority of patients with spontaneous hypoglycaemia manifest one plasma glucose concentration less than 2.5 mmol/L during an overnight (18-h) fast when assayed on three separate occasions. ● Exercise test Exercise may be used in the induction of insulin-induced hypoglycaemia. Blood is collected at 10-min intervals during 30 min of intense exercise, for example treadmill, and 30 min after stopping. Plasma insulin and C-peptide (and proinsulin, if necessary) are assayed and will be inappropriately high in endogenous hyperinsulinaemia and suppressed appropriately in hypoinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia. ● Prolonged fast The prolonged fast, of up to 4 h, may be reserved for cases where there is a high index of suspicion of hypoglycaemia that has not been provoked spontaneously or by the above tests. It should be noted that, during the prolonged fast, the patient must be under close supervision as potentially dangerous. Blood should be taken every 6 h for plasma glucose and insulin estimations and, if symptoms occur, should be assayed for glucose immediately. The test can be stopped if hypoglycaemia is demonstrated. The patient should be fed after the test. If prolonged fasting does not induce hypoglycaemia, endogenous hyperinsulinism is unlikely to be the cause of the symptoms. A few normal individuals may show plasma glucose levels less than 2.5 mmol/L during the test, but they do not exhibit neuroglycopenic symptoms or Whipple’s triad. A plasma insulin to C-peptide ratio of less than 1 has about 89 per cent sensitivity and 100 per cent speciﬁ city for insulinoma. The insulin provocation test is now rarely used (as it can evoke dangerous hypoglycaemia) – in it, insulin administration fails to suppress plasma insulin and C-peptide in cases of insulinoma. Reactive hypoglycaemia should not be diagnosed by a prolonged 75 g OGTT, as normal individuals may show false-positive results. However, the mixed meal, based on the sort of foods that evoke the attacks, can be used to investigate post-prandial neuroglycopenic symptoms. Capillary blood samples are taken prior to and every half-hour for 6 h after mixed-meal ingestion. Reactive hypoglycaemia is a possible diagnosis if the patient develops neuroglycopenic symptoms and the capillary plasma glucose concentration is 3.0 mmol/L or less. Note that venous plasma should ideally not be used, as false-positive results may result because post- prandial glucose concentrations can be 1–2 mmol/L lower than in capillary blood samples.