Occasionally, the prodrug approach is used to enhance the absorption of a drug that is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Enalapril is the ethyl ester of enalaprilic acid, an active inhibitor of angiotensin- converting enzyme (ACE). The ester prodrug is much more readily absorbed orally than the pharmacologically active carboxylic acid. Unless the drug is intended to act locally in the gas- trointestinal tract, it will have to pass through the gastroin- testinal mucosal barrier into venous circulation to reach the site of the receptor. The drug’s route involves distribu- tion or partitioning between the aqueous environment of the gastrointestinal tract, the lipid bilayer cell membrane of the mucosal cells, possibly the aqueous interior of the mu- cosal cells, the lipid bilayer membranes on the venous side of the gastrointestinal tract, and the aqueous environment of venous circulation. Some very lipid-soluble drugs may follow the route of dietary lipids by becoming part of the mixed micelles, incorporating into the chylomicrons in the mucosal cells into the lymph ducts, servicing the intes- tines, and finally entering venous circulation via the tho- racic duct. The drug’s passage through the mucosal cells can be passive or active. As is discussed later in this chapter, the lipid membranes are very complex with a highly or- dered structure. Part of this membrane is a series of chan- nels or tunnels that form, disappear, and reform. There are receptors that move compounds into the cell by a process called pinocytosis. Drugs that resemble a normal metabolic precursor or intermediate may be actively trans- ported into the cell by the same system that transports the endogenous compound. On the other hand, most drug molecules are too large to enter the cell by an active transport mechanism through the passages. The latter, many times, pass into the patient’s circulatory system by passive diffusion. Parenteral Administration Many times, there will be therapeutic advantages in bypass- ing the intestinal barrier by using parenteral (injectable) dosage forms. This is common in patients who, because of illness, cannot tolerate or are incapable of accepting drugs orally. Some drugs are so rapidly and completely metabo- lized to inactive products in the liver (first-pass effect) that oral administration is precluded. But that does not mean that the drug administered by injection is not confronted by obstacles (Fig. 2.1). Intravenous administration places the drug directly into the circulatory system, where it will be rapidly distributed throughout the body, including tissue depots and the liver, where most biotransformations occur (see later in this chapter), in addition to the receptors. Subcutaneous and intramuscular injections slow distribu- tion of the drug, because it must diffuse from the site of in- jection into systemic circulation. It is possible to inject the drug directly into specific or- gans or areas of the body. Intraspinal and intracerebral routes will place the drug directly into the spinal fluid or brain, respectively. This bypasses a specialized epithelial tissue, the blood-brain barrier, which protects the brain from exposure to a large number of metabolites and chemicals. The blood-brain barrier is composed of membranes of tightly joined epithelial cells lining the cerebral capillaries. The net result is that the brain is not exposed to the same va- riety of compounds that other organs are. Local anesthetics are examples of administration of a drug directly onto the desired nerve. A spinal block is a form of anesthesia per- formed by injecting a local anesthetic directly into the spinal cord at a specific location to block transmission along spe- cific neurons. Most of the injections a patient will experience in a life- time will be subcutaneous or intramuscular. These par- enteral routes produce a depot in the tissues (Fig. 2.1), from which the drug must reach the blood or lymph. Once in sys- temic circulation, the drug will undergo the same distribu- tive phenomena as orally and intravenously administered agents before reaching the target receptor. In general, the same factors that control the drug’s passage through the gas- trointestinal mucosa will also determine the rate of move- ment out of the tissue depot. The prodrug approach described previously can also be used to alter the solubility characteristics, which, in turn, can increase the flexibility in formulating dosage forms. The solubility of methylprednisolone can be altered from essentially water-insoluble methylprednisolone acetate to slightly water-insoluble methylprednisolone to water-soluble methylprednisolone sodium succinate. The water-soluble sodium hemisuccinate salt is used in oral, intravenous, and intramuscular dosage forms. Methylprednisolone itself is normally found in tablets. The acetate ester is found in topi- cal ointments and sterile aqueous suspensions for intramus- cular injection. Both the succinate and acetate esters are hydrolyzed to the active methylprednisolone by the patient’s own systemic hydrolytic enzymes (esterases). Chapter 2 Drug Design Strategies 5