PhyTochemisTRy 144 17 A development which combines the advantages of both gel filtration and electrophoresis is that of polyacrylamide gradient gel electropho- resis. It is a two-dimensional electrophoresis system which separates according to mobility of solutes in one direction and according to size in the other. Capillary electrophoresis is a technique of relatively recent introduc- tion and can give separation efficiencies of the order of 4 × 105 theoreti- cal plates. It provides a more rapid analysis than gel electrophoresis and with detector systems such as the laser-induced fluorescence detector combines a high resolution with a 500-fold increase in sensitivity over UV detection. The method has been used for the analysis of flavonoids. affinity chromatography This method has been developed largely for the resolution of protein mixtures, and it depends on the specific, reversible binding of indi- vidual proteins with a particular ligand such as an enzyme substrate or inhibitor. The ligands are coupled with a suitable carrier (cellu- lose, beaded agarose, controlled-pore glass, polyacrylamide or cross- linked dextrans), possibly with the introduction of a spacer—a suitable chemical moiety such as a hydrocarbon chain—between the ligand and matrix. Excess ligand is removed by washing and the material is packed in a column. A protein mixture in a suitable buffer solution is passed down the column and a protein with sufficient affinity for the bound ligand is retarded and may later be eluted in a purified state by a change in ionic strength or pH of the column buffer. The method has the advantage of preparing in one step a particular component in a high state of purity. Affinity chromatography has been applied to the purification of enzymes for potential clinical application, for the isolation of certain antibodies and for the specific fractionation of different types of cells (e.g. erythrocytes and lymphocytes). characteriZation of isolated compounds It is outside the scope of this book to consider in any detail the structure elucidation of natural products. It is sufficient to state that although still utilizing classical chemical methods of degradation, chemists are coming to rely more and more on the use of physical techniques to establish structures of new compounds and to identify known com- pounds in plant sources. Ultraviolet, infrared, mass and nuclear mag- netic resonance spectroscopy together with X-ray crystallographic and optical rotatory dispersion methods have all played a significant role in these developments. Various modifications of mass spectrometry (MS) have become of increasing importance for the structural charac- terization and determination of the active constituents of plants; these include electron ionization MS, chemical ionization MS, field desorp- tion MS, fast atom bombardment MS and electrospray ionization MS. For an example of the application of electrospray MS combined with sequential tandem mass spectrometry to the investigation of the steroidal saponin mixture of the Chinese and Indian drug Tribulus terrestris, see S. Fang et al., Planta Medica, 1999, 65, 68. Many problems of structure elucidation which 40 years ago were incapable of investi- gation, either through paucity of material or through lack of suitable chemical methods, can now readily be solved in a standard research laboratory. J. Schmidt et al. (Phytochemistry, 2007, 68, 189), using liquid chromatography and similar combined MS techniques to the above, have demonstrated the importance of such methods for evaluat- ing biosynthetic pathways and for studying the fate of distant natural product precursors in specific plants. They fed [ring-13C-6] tyramine to Papaver somniferum seedlings and elucidated the structures of some twenty alkaloids into which the tyramine was incorporated; the alka- loids included those of the morphinan, benzoisoquinoline, protober- berine, benzo[c]phenanthridine, phthalide, isoquinoline and protopine classes. The routine analytical application of some of these techniques to plant drug analysis has been considered in Chapter 16. bioGenetic investiGations The living material used in biochemical research is extremely varied. Some work is possible which utilizes the whole organism with a mini- mum of disturbance—for example, bacteria, yeasts and moulds can be cultivated and investigated biochemically, and with animals, test substances can be added to the food and the blood and excreta analy- sed. With intact higher plants, however, the ultimate destruction of the plant for analysis is usually necessary. Minces, breis and homogenates are examples of preparations in which the tissues and the cell wall structures have been destroyed but in which the intracellular particles are still intact. The components of such a mixture can be isolated by centrifugation and the biological activity of each fraction can be tested. The penultimate stage in a biogenetic study is the isolation of the enzymes involved in the pathways under consideration and the in vitro demonstration of their properties. Finally, it is becoming increasingly possible to locate and clone the gene responsible for the synthesis of a particular enzyme. Now that the principal overall pathways associ- ated with secondary metabolism have been largely established, it is the enzymic studies that currently receive considerable attention. The techniques discussed below have been used for the study of secondary metabolism and their application dates from the middle of the last century; they relate principally to the search for the inter- mediates involved in particular pathways rather than to reaction mech- anistics. It must be remembered however that many of the primary metabolic pathways, e.g. the Krebs (TCA) cycle, were established using classical biochemical methods. tracer techniQues Tracer technology, now widely employed in all branches of science, had its origin in the early part of the last century, when it was realized that elements existed with identical chemical properties but with dif- ferent atomic weights. Such isotopes may be stable (2H, 13C, 15N, 18O), or the nucleus may be unstable (1H, 14C) and decay with the emission of radiation. If it is possible to detect these isotopes by suitable means, then they can be incorporated into presumed precursors of plant constituents and used as markers in biogenetic experiments. Radioactive tracers. In biological investigations the use of radioac- tive carbon and hydrogen, and to a lesser extent and for more specific purposes sulphur, phosphorus and the alkali and alkaline-earth met- als, enables the metabolism of compounds to be followed in the living organism. For studies on proteins, alkaloids and amino acids a labelled nitrogen atom may give more specific information than a labelled carbon, but the two available isotopes of nitrogen are both stable, necessitating the use of a mass spectrometer for their use as tracers. Natural carbon possesses two stable isotopes with mass numbers 12 and 13, the latter having an abundance of 1.10 atoms per cent. Radioactive isotopes of carbon have mass numbers of 10, 11 and 14. 10C has a half-life of 8.8 s and 11C a half-life of 20 min., which limits their usefulness in biological research. However, 14C has an estimated half-life of over 5000 years and in the atomic pile it may be produced by the bombardment of 14N with slow neutrons, the target material usually being aluminium or beryllium nitride.