PhyTochemisTRy 138 17 Various substances may be used as adsorbing materials; alumina is the most common and other materials include kaolin, magnesium oxide, calcium carbonate, charcoal and sugars. When colourless substances are chromatographed, the zones of adsorbed material are not visible to the eye, although they may, in some cases, be rendered apparent as fluorescent zones when the column is examined under ultraviolet light. Failing this, it becomes necessary to divide the chromatogram into discrete portions and elute or extract each portion separately. Sometimes it is more convenient to collect the eluate from the whole column in fractions for individual examination. The apparatus required is simple and consists essentially of a verti- cal glass tube into which the adsorbent has been packed; a small plug of glass wool or a sintered glass disc, at the base of the tube, supports the column. With volatile developing solvents it is usually preferable to use a positive pressure at the head of the column. Numerous modi- fications of the apparatus are used for large-scale operations, for use with heated solvents and for chromatography in the absence of air or oxygen. Adsorption chromatography has proved particularly valuable in the isolation and purification of vitamins, hormones, many alkaloids, car- diac glycosides, anthraquinones, etc. It is commonly employed as a ‘clean-up’ technique for the removal of unwanted materials from plant extracts prior to assay. Thin-layer chromatography with adsorbents such as alumina is an adaptation of the method and is discussed separately in this chapter. partition chromatography Partition chromatography was introduced by Martin and Synge in 1941 for the separation of acetylated amino acids and was first applied to the separation of alkaloids by Evans and Partridge in 1948. The method has now been largely superseded by the more sophisticated HPLC (see below) but it retains the advantage of being inexpensive to set up and operate. The separation of the components of a mixture is, as in counter-current extraction, dependent on differences in the partition coefficients of the components between an aqueous and an immiscible organic liquid. The aqueous phase is usually the stationary phase and is intimately mixed with a suitable ‘carrier’ such as silica gel, purified kieselguhr or powdered glass and packed in a column as in adsorption chromatogra- phy. The mixture to be fractionated is introduced on the column, in a small volume of organic solvent, and the chromatogram is developed with more solvent or successively with different solvents of increasing eluting power. When water is the stationary phase, the solutes undergo- ing separation travel down the column at different speeds depending on their partition coefficient between the two liquid phases; the use of a buffer solution as aqueous phase widens the scope of the tech- nique, as ionization constants and partition coefficients are exploited in effecting separation. The separated zones may be located by methods similar to those employed in adsorption chromatography. With water as the aque- ous phase, the positions of separated zones of acids or alkalis may be shown by employing a suitable indicator dissolved in the water. This method is clearly not applicable to buffer-, acid- or alkali-loaded columns, and in these cases complete elution (elution development) of the separated zone is often necessary. The eluate is collected in aliquot portions and estimated chemically or physically for dissolved solute. A graph of the analytical figure (titration, optical rotation, optical density, refractive index, etc.) for each fraction of eluate may then be plotted to show the degree of separation of the solutes. The fractionations obtained in partition chromatography are influ- enced to a considerable degree by the displacement effect of one solute on another and advantage is taken of this in displacement development, in which the chromatogram is developed with a solu- tion of an acid or a base that is stronger than any in the mixture to be separated. The effect is for the stronger acids or bases to displace the weaker ones, resulting in a rapid clear-cut separation of the con- stituents. For the elution development of these separated zones it is essential that there is no distortion of the zones, since the front of one band follows immediately on the tail of the preceding less acidic or less basic component. There have been several theoretical treatments of partition chroma- tography, all involving certain approximations, since a theory taking into account all known variables would be extremely complicated. For general purposes, one of the most satisfactory treatments of columns loaded with water is that of Martin and Synge, in which the theoretical plate concept of fractional distillation is applied to partition chroma- tography. In this theory, diffusion from one plate to another is taken as negligible and the partition of solute between two phases is indepen- dent of concentration and the presence of other solutes. partition chromatography on paper In 1944 Consden, Gordon and Martin introduced a method of partition chromatography using strips of filter paper as ‘carriers’ for the analysis of amino acid mixtures. The technique was extended to all classes of natural products, and although to a large measure replaced by thin- layer chromatography (TLC), it remains the method of choice for the fractionation of some groups of substances. The solution of components to be separated is applied as a spot near one end of a prepared filter-paper strip. The paper is then sup- ported in an airtight chamber which has an atmosphere saturated with solvent and water, and a supply of the water-saturated solvent. The most satisfactory solvents are those which are partially miscible with water, such as phenol, n-butanol and amyl alcohol. Either the paper may be dipped in the solvent mixture so that the solvent front travels up the paper (ascending technique) or the trough of solvent may be supported at the top of the chamber, in which case the solvent travels down the paper (descending technique). The BP 2007 gives details of both methods. As the solvent moves, the components also move along the paper at varying rates, depending mainly on the differ- ences in their partition coefficients between the aqueous (hydration shell of cellulose fibres) and organic phases. After the filter-paper strips have been dried, the positions of the separated components can be revealed by the use of suitable developing agents: ninhydrin solution for amino acids; iodine solution (or vapour) or a modified Dragendorff’s reagent for alkaloids; ferric chloride solution for phenols; alkali for anthraquinone derivatives; antimony trichloride in chloroform for steroids and some components of volatile oils; ani- line hydrogen phthalate reagent for sugars. The relative positions of the components and the size of the spots depend upon the solvent, and this should be selected to give good separation of the compo- nents with well-defined, compact spots. Improved separation of mix- tures can often be obtained by adjusting the acidity of the solvent with ammonia, acetic acid or hydrochloric acid or by impregnating the paper with a buffer solution or formamide solution. For the separation of some substances it is necessary to use a two- dimensional chromatogram: first one solvent is run in one direction, then, after drying of the paper, a second solvent is run in a direction at right angles to the first—this is particularly applicable to mixtures of amino acids. The ratio between the distance travelled on the paper by a component of the test solution and the distance travelled by the solvent is termed the RF value and, under standard conditions, this is a constant for the particu- lar compound. However, in practice, variations of RF often occur and it is desirable to run reference compounds alongside unknown mixtures.