CHAPTER 5 Dosage Form Design: Biopharmaceutical and Pharmacokinetic Considerations 151 This may be clinically significant for drugs that bind strongly to albumin, for example, phenytoin, because if there is less albumin available to bind the drug, there will be a corre­ sponding increase of the free drug in the body. Without a downward dosage adjustment in an elderly patient, there could be an increased incidence of adverse effects. A drug's binding to blood proteins may be affected by the simultaneous presence of another drug or drugs. The additional drug or drugs may produce effects or dura­ tion of action quite dissimilar to that found when each is administered alone. Salicylates, for instance, decrease the binding capacity of thyroxin, the thyroid hormone, to proteins. Through this action, the displaced drugs become less protein bound, and their activity (and toxicity) may be increased. The intensity of a drug's pharmacologic response is related to the ratio of the bound drug to free active drug and to the therapeutic index of the drug. Warfarin sodium, an anticoagulant, is 97% bound to plasma protein, leaving 3% in free form to exert its effect. If a second drug, such as naproxen, which is strongly bound to plasma proteins, is administered and results in only 90% of the warfarin sodium being bound, 10% of warfarin sodium will be in the free form. Thus, the blood level of the free warfarin sodium (3% to 10%) will triple and possibly result in serious toxicity. The displacement of drugs from plasma protein sites is typical in the elderly, who normally take numerous medicines. Coupled with the aforementioned decrease in serum protein through the aging process, the addition of a highly protein-bound drug to an elderly patient's treatment regimen may pose significant problems if the patient is not monitored carefully for signs of toxicity. In the same manner as they are bound to blood pro­ teins, drugs may become bound to specific components of certain cells. Thus, drugs are not distributed uniformly among all cells of the body but rather tend to pass from the blood into the fluid bathing the tissues and may accu­ mulate in certain cells according to their permeability and chemical and physical affinities. This affinity for certain body sites influences their action, for they may be brought into contact with reactive tissues ( their receptor sites) or deposited in places where they are inactive. Many drugs, because of their affinity for and solubility in lipids, are deposited in fatty body tissue, creating a reservoir from which they are slowly released to other tissues. Drug Metabolism or Biotransformation Although some drugs are excreted from the body in their original form, many drugs undergo biotransformation prior to excretion. Biotransformation indicates the chemi­ cal changes to drugs within the body as they are metabo­ lized and altered by various biochemical mechanisms. The biotransformation of a drug results in its conversion to one or more compounds that are more water soluble, more ion­ ized, less capable of binding to proteins of the plasma and tissues, less capable of being stored in fat tissue, and less able to penetrate cell membranes, and thereby less active pharmacologically. Because of its new characteristics, a drug so transformed is rendered less toxic and is more readily excreted. It is for this reason that biotransforma­ tion is also commonly called detoxification or inactivation. (However, sometimes the metabolites are more active than the parent compound; see prodrugs, following.) The exact metabolic processes (pathways) by which drugs are transformed are an active area of biomedical research. Much work has been done with the processes of animal degradation of drugs, and in many instances, the biotransformation in the animal is thought to parallel that in man. Four principal chemical reactions are involved in the metabolism of drugs: oxidation, reduction, hydrolysis, and conjugation. Most oxidation reactions are catalyzed by enzymes (oxidases) bound to the endoplasmic reticulum, a tubular system in liver cells. Only a small fraction of drugs are metabolized by reduction, through the action of reduc­ tases in the gut and liver. Esterases in the liver participate in the hydrolytic breakdown of drugs containing ester groups and amides. Glucuronide conjugation is the most common pathway for drug metabolism, through combination of the drug with glucuronic acid, forming ionized compounds that are easily eliminated via the urine (7). Other metabolic processes, including methylation and acylation conjugation reactions, occur with certain drugs to foster elimination. In recent years, much interest has been shown in the metabolites of drug biotransformation. Certain metabo­ lites may be as active as or even more active pharmacologi­ cally than the original compound. Occasionally, an active drug is converted into an active metabolite, which must be excreted as such or undergo further biotransforma­ tion to an inactive metabolite, for example, amitriptyline to nortriptyline. In other instances of drug therapy, an inactive parent compound, referred to as a prodrug, may be converted to an active therapeutic agent by chemical transformation in the body. An example is the prodrug enalapril (Vasotec), which after oral administration is hydrolyzed to enalaprilat, an active angiotensin-convert­ ing enzyme inhibitor used in the treatment of hyperten­ sion. Enalaprilat itself is poorly absorbed when taken orally (and thus the prodrug) but may be administered intravenously in aqueous solution. The use of these active metabolites as original drugs is a new area of investigation and a vast reservoir of potential therapeutic agents. Several examples of biotransformations occurring within the body are as follows: (1) Acetaminophen (active) conjugation Acetaminophen glucuronide (inactive) (2) Amoxapine (active) oxidation ) 8-hydroxy-amoxapine (inactive) (3) Procainamide (active) hydrolysis p-Aminobenzoic acid (inactive) (4) Nitroglycerin (active) reduction ) 1 - 2 and 1 - 3 dinitroglycerol (inactive)