1Baroreceptor reflex. Note: Undesirable effects are shown in italics. TABLE 12–7 Effects of nitrates alone and with a blockers or calcium channel blockers in angina pectoris. Nitrates Alone Beta Blockers or Calcium Channel Blockers Alone Combined Nitrates with Beta Blockers or Calcium Channel Blockers Heart rate Reflex1 increase Decrease Decrease Arterial pressure Decrease Decrease Decrease End­diastolic volume Decrease Increase None or decrease Contractility Reflex1 increase Decrease None Ejection time Decrease1 Increase None Vasospastic Angina Nitrates and the calcium channel blockers, but not β blockers, are effective drugs for relieving and preventing ischemic episodes in patients with variant angina. In approximately 70% of patients treated with nitrates plus calcium channel blockers, angina attacks are completely abolished; in another 20%, marked reduction of frequency of anginal episodes is observed. Prevention of coronary artery spasm (with or without fixed atherosclerotic coronary artery lesions) is the principal mechanism for this beneficial response. All presently available calcium channel blockers appear to be equally effective, and the choice of a particular drug should depend on the patient. Surgical revascularization and angioplasty are not indicated in patients with variant angina. Unstable Angina & Acute Coronary Syndromes In patients with unstable angina with recurrent ischemic episodes at rest, recurrent platelet­rich nonocclusive thrombus formation is the principal mechanism. Aggressive antiplatelet therapy with a combination of aspirin and clopidogrel is indicated. Evidence for the addition of intravenous heparin or subcutaneous low­molecular­weight heparin is mixed. If percutaneous coronary intervention with stenting is required (and most patients with ACS are treated with stenting), glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors such as abciximab should be added. In addition, therapy with nitroglycerin and β blockers should be considered; calcium channel blockers should be added in refractory cases for relief of myocardial ischemia. Primary lipid­lowering and ACE­inhibitor therapy should also be initiated. TREATMENT OF PERIPHERAL ARTERY DISEASE & INTERMITTENT CLAUDICATION Atherosclerosis can result in ischemia of peripheral muscles just as coronary artery disease causes cardiac ischemia. If blood flow is limited, pain (claudication) occurs in skeletal muscles, especially in the legs, during exercise and disappears with rest. Although claudication is not immediately life­ threatening, peripheral artery disease (PAD) is associated with increased mortality, can severely limit exercise tolerance, and may be associated with chronic ischemic ulcers, susceptibility to infection, and the need for amputation. Intermittent claudication results from obstruction of blood flow by atheromas in large and medium arteries. Insertion of stents in the obstructed l i ll i di t d d li b th t ld th i i t ti S i d i th i f b fit i d i