CHAPTER 5 Dosage Form Design: Biopharmaceutical and Pharmacokinetic Considerations 147 Rectal Route Some drugs are administered rectally for their local effects and others for their systemic effects. Drugs given rectally may be administered as solutions, suppositories, or oint­ ments. Suppositories are solid bodies of various weights and shapes intended for introduction into a body orifice ( usually rectal, vaginal, or urethral) where they soften, melt, or dissolve; release their medication; and exert their drug effects. These effects simply may be the promotion of taxation (as with glycerin suppositories), the soothing of inflamed tissues (as with various commercial supposi­ tories used to relieve the discomfort of hemorrhoids), or the promotion of systemic effects (as antinausea or anti­ motion sickness). The composition of the suppository base, or carrier, can greatly influence the degree and rate of drug release and should be selected on an individual basis for each drug. The use of rectal ointments is generally lim­ ited to the treatment of local conditions. Rectal solutions are usually employed as enemas or cleansing solutions. The rectum and the colon can absorb many soluble drugs. Rectal administration for systemic action may be preferred for drugs destroyed or inactivated by the envi­ ronments of the stomach and intestines. The administra­ tion of drugs by the rectal route may also be indicated when the oral route is precluded because of vomiting or when the patient is unconscious or incapable of swallow­ ing drugs safely without choking. Approximately 50% of a dose of drug absorbed from rectal administration is likely to bypass the liver, an important factor when consider­ ing orally administered drugs that are rapidly destroyed in the liver by the first-pass effect. On the negative side, compared with oral administration, rectal administration of drugs is inconvenient and offensive to some patients, and the absorption of drugs from the rectum is frequently irregular and difficult to predict. Parenteral Route The term parenteral is derived from the Greek words para, meaning beside, and enteron, meaning intestine, which together indicate something done outside of the intestine and not by way of the alimentary tract. A drug administered parenterally is one injected through the hollow of a fine needle into the body at various sites and to various depths. The three primary routes of parenteral administration are subcutaneous, intramuscular, and intravenous, although there are others, such as intracardiac and intraspinal. Drugs destroyed or inactivated in the gastrointesti­ nal tract or too poorly absorbed to provide satisfactory response may be parenterally administered. The parenteral route is also preferred when rapid absorption is essential, as in emergencies. Not only is absorption by the parenteral route faster than after oral administration, but also the blood levels of drug that result are far more predictable, because little is lost after subcutaneous or intramuscular injection and virtually none by intravenous injection; this also generally permits the administration of smaller doses. The parenteral route of administration is especially useful in treating patients who are uncooperative, unconscious, or otherwise unable to accept oral medication. One disadvantage of parenteral administration is that once the drug is injected, there is no retreat. That is, once the substance is in the tissues or bloodstream, removal of the drug warranted by an untoward or toxic effect or an inadvertent overdose is most difficult. By other means of administration, there is more time between drug adminis­ tration and drug absorption, which becomes a safety fac­ tor by allowing for the extraction of unabsorbed drug ( as by the induction of vomiting after an orally administered drug). Also, because of the strict sterility requirements for all injections, they are more expensive than are other dos­ age forms and require competent trained personnel for proper administration. Dosage Forms Applicable Pharmaceutically, most injectable preparations are either a sterile suspension or solution of a drug substance in water or in a suitable vegetable oil. Drugs in solution act more rapidly than do drugs in suspension, with an aqueous vehicle providing faster action in each instance than an oleaginous vehicle. As in other instances of drug absorption, a drug must be in solution to be absorbed, and a suspended drug must first submit to dissolution. Also, because body fluids are aqueous, they are more recep­ tive to drugs in an aqueous vehicle than those in an oily one. For these reasons, the rate of drug absorption can be varied in parenteral products by selective combinations of drug state and supporting vehicle. For instance, a suspen­ sion of a drug in a vegetable oil is likely to be much more slowly absorbed than an aqueous solution of the same drug. Slow absorption means prolonged drug action, and when this is achieved through pharmaceutical means, the resulting preparation is referred to as a depot or repository injection, because it provides a storage reservoir of the drug substance within the body from which it is slowly removed into the systemic circulation. In this regard, even more sustained drug action may be achieved through the use of subcutaneous implantation of compressed tablets, termed pellets, that are only slowly dissolved from their site of implantation, releasing their medication at a fairly constant rate over several weeks to many months. The repository type of injection is mainly limited to the sub­ cutaneous or intramuscular route. It is obvious that drugs injected intravenously do not encounter absorption barri­ ers and thus produce only rapid drug effects. Preparations for intravenous injection must not interfere with the blood components or with circulation and therefore, with few exceptions, are aqueous solutions. Subcutaneous Injections The subcutaneous (hypodermic) administration of drugs entails injection through the skin into the loose subcu­ taneous tissue. Subcutaneous injections are prepared as