552 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS of cystic fibrosis. More recently, IP has been used in the topical delivery of fluoride to the teeth, dexamethasone as an anti-inflammatory into joints, and lidocaine as a topical anesthetic. Drugs such as corticosteroids, nonste­ roidal anti-inflammatory agents, and anesthetics are com­ monly delivered via IP. Other drugs under study include a number of analgesics, nicotine, anti-AIDS drugs, cancer drugs, insulin, and proteins. IP is also useful in veterinary medicine. In the IP process, the current, beginning at the device, is transferred from the electrode through the ionized drug solution as ionic flow. The drug ions move to the skin, where the repulsion continues, moving the drug through whatever pathways are available, namely, pores, and possibly through a disrupted stratum corneum. The drug-containing electrode is termed the active electrode, and the other electrode, the passive electrode, is placed elsewhere on the body. Current densities up to 0.5 mA/cm2 can be tolerated with little or no discomfort. The larger the electrode surface, the greater the current the device must supply to provide a current density for moving the drug. The delivery of a drug iontophoretically is quite com­ plex, depending on the interactions between the drug and the vehicle electrolyte or buffer, partitioning of the drug between the vehicle and the skin, and then diffu­ sion through a highly heterogeneous membrane under the influence of both chemical and electrical potential gradients. The movement of ions across the skin is described by the relationship known as the Nernst-Planck equation: where Ji is flux; dCi dE J. = -D. - - Z.mFC. ­ ' ' dX ' ' dX Di is diffusivity; dCJ dx is concentration gradient; zi is valence of the species I; m is mobility; F is Faraday constant; Ci is concentration; and dE/ dx is electrostatic potential gradient. Variables affecting IP include aspects of the current, the physicochemical properties of the drug, formulation fac­ tors, biologic factors, and electroendosmotic flow. The current can be direct, alternate, or pulsed and can have various waveforms, including square, sinusoidal, tri­ angular, and trapezoidal. There may not be much advan­ tage to the more complex forms, as direct current is most commonly used at this time. Physicochemical variables include the charge, size, structure, and lipophilicity of the drug. The drug should be water soluble, low dose, and ionizable with a high charge density. Smaller molecules are more mobile, but large molecules are also usable. Formulation factors include drug concentration, pH, ionic strength, and viscosity. Increasing drug concentra­ tion usually results in greater drug delivery to a certain degree. Buffer ions in a formula will compete with the drug for the delivery current, decreasing the quantity of drug delivered, especially because buffer ions are gener­ ally smaller and more mobile than the larger active drug. The pH of solutions can be adjusted and maintained by larger molecules, such as ethanolamine: ethanolamine HCl rather than the smaller hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide. An increase in ionic strength of the system will also increase the competition for the available current, especially because the active drugs are generally potent and present in a small concentration as compared to these extraneous ions. Biologic factors pertain to the skin to which the elec­ trodes are applied, its thickness, permeability, presence of pores, and so on. Electroendosmotic flow results when a voltage difference is applied across a charged porous membrane, resulting in a bulk fluid flow in the same direction as the flow of coun­ ter ions. This fluid flow can actually carry a drug with it into the skin, especially positively charged, cationic, drugs. Neutral drugs can also be carried via electroendosmotic flow. Iontophoretic devices have changed remarkably over the years, ranging from the galvanometers of the past to the small, specially designed units of today. Example IP units and electrodes are shown in Figures 20.1 to 20.3. Iontophoretic units are now sized similarly to today's transdermal patches. They may be slightly thicker to accommodate the power source and small microproces­ sor controllers. The future may include IP patches capable of sampling and testing ( e.g., glucose levels) and adjusting the delivery rate of a drug (e.g., insulin), all in the same IP system. Reverse IP can be used to extract chemicals or drugs from the body for testing. Many types of patches with electrodes may require pharmacists to add the drug prior to dispensing, as is done today in filling reservoirs for parenteral administration. Drugs currently adminis­ tered using IP are listed in Tables 20.1 (human) and 20.2 (veterinary). Because most solutions designed specifically for IP are not commercially available, they must be com­ pounded. It is best to have only the drug and water present to minimize competition for the active ions. An IP system called Numby Stuff (IOMED) is used to achieve local anesthesia of the skin and is promoted as a painless, needleless system. Iontophoretic administration is also used in veterinary pharmacy, using drugs such as those listed in Table 20.2. Because of the difference in the size and anatomy of the animal patient, different electrodes may be required. IP has been studied to enhance ungula penetration for the treatment of fungal infections in the nails. IP does moderately increase penetration as compared to passive diffusion (1).