Physiology 181 In the liver, triglycerides are formed from glycerol- 3-phosphate (from triose phosphate or glyceraldehyde- 3-phosphate) and fatty acids [from acetyl coenzyme A (CoA)]. The triglycerides are transported to adipose tissue cells incorporated in VLDL, where they are hydrolysed by lipoprotein lipase. The released fatty acids (of hepatic origin) are re-esteriﬁ ed within these cells with glycerol-3-phosphate, derived from glucose, which has entered this tissue under the inﬂ uence of insulin. The resultant triglyceride is stored and is far more energy dense than glycogen (see Chapter 13). During fasting, when exogenous glucose is unavailable and the plasma insulin concentration is therefore low, endogenous triglycerides are reconverted to free non-esteriﬁ ed fatty acids (NEFAs) and glycerol by lipolysis (Fig. 12.6). Both are transported to the liver in plasma, the NEFA being protein bound, predominantly to albumin. Glycerol enters the hepatic gluconeogenic pathway at the triose phosphate stage; the glucose synthesized can be released from these cells, thus minimizing the fall in glucose concentrations. Most tissues, other than the brain, can oxidize fatty acids to acetyl CoA, which can then be used in the TCA cycle as an energy source. When the rate of synthesis exceeds its use, the hepatic cells produce acetoacetic acid by enzymatic condensation of two molecules of acetyl CoA; acetoacetic acid can be reduced to b-hydroxybutyric acid and decarboxylated to acetone. These ketones can be used as an energy source by brain and other tissues at a time when glucose is in relatively short supply. Ketosis occurs when fat stores are the main energy source and may result from fasting or from reduced nutrient absorption, for example due to vomiting. Mild ketosis may occur after as little as 12 h of fasting. After short fasts, metabolic acidosis is not usually detectable, but, after longer periods, more hydrogen ions may be produced than can be dealt with by homeostatic buffering mechanisms, depleting the plasma bicarbonate concentration, which therefore falls (see Chapter 4). The plasma glucose concentration is maintained principally by hepatic gluconeogenesis, but during prolonged starvation, such as that in anorexia nervosa or during childhood, ketotic hypoglycaemia may occur. The Figure 12.6 Intermediary metabolism during fasting: ketosis. CoA, coenzyme A; FA, fatty acid; G6P, glucose-6-phosphate; NEFA, non-esteriﬁ ed fatty acid. Triglyceride G6P Triose-P GLYCOGEN CO2 + H2O G6P BRAIN LIVER ADIPOSE TISSUE Acetyl CoA Pyruvate Acetyl CoA KETONES + H+ Glycerol + FA Glucose KETONES + H+ NEFA