109 Heart Failure | CHAPTER 9 • Most nonpharmacologic therapies for ADHF are reserved for patients failing pharmaco- logic therapy. Ultrafiltration and wireless invasive hemodynamic monitoring (W-IHM) may be used to manage congestive symptoms. Temporary mechanical circulatory support (MCS) with an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), ventricular assist device (VAD), or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may be considered for hemodynamic stabilization until the underlying etiology of cardiac dysfunction resolves or has been corrected (“bridge to recovery”) or until evaluation for definitive therapy (eg, durable MCS or cardiac transplantation) can be completed (“bridge to decision”). IV vasodilators and inotropes may be used with temporary MCS to maximize hemody- namic and clinical benefits or facilitate device removal. Systemic anticoagulant therapy is generally required to prevent device thrombosis, regardless of the method selected. • Durable MCS with temporary device implantation is used for patients awaiting heart transplantation who are unlikely to survive until a suitable donor is identified (“bridge to transplantation”). Permanent device implantation is used in patients ineligible for heart transplantation due to advanced age or comorbid conditions (“destination therapy”). • Cardiac transplantation is the best option for patients with irreversible advanced HF. New surgical strategies such as ventricular aneurysm resection and myocardial cell transplantation offer additional options for patients ineligible for VAD implantation or heart transplantation. PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR ADHF Loop Diuretics • Current guidelines recommend IV loop diuretics (furosemide, bumetanide) as first- line therapy for ADHF patients with volume overload. • Bolus administration reduces preload by functional venodilation within 5–15 minutes and later (>20 minutes) via sodium and water excretion, thereby improv- ing pulmonary congestion. Although patients with HFrEF can tolerate significant reductions in preload without compromising stroke volume, excessive diuresis can decrease CO. Excessive reductions in venous return may also compromise CO in diastolic dysfunction, intravascular volume depletion, or patients in whom CO is significantly dependent on adequate filling pressure (ie, preload-dependent). Reflex increases in neurohormonal activation (ie, elevated renin, norepinephrine, and AVP) may result in arteriolar and coronary vasoconstriction, tachycardia, and increased myocardial oxygen consumption. • Use low doses (equivalent to IV furosemide 20–40 mg) initially in ADHF patients who are naïve to loop diuretics. For patients taking loop diuretics prior to admission, a total daily dose of 1- to 2.5-times their home dose is recommended. Higher doses are associated with more rapid relief of congestive symptoms but may also increase the risk of transient worsening of renal function. Doses may be administered as either an IV bolus (ie, divided every 12 hours) or continuous IV infusion. Use diuretic therapy judiciously to obtain the desired improvement in congestive symptoms while avoiding a reduction in CO, symptomatic hypotension, or worsening renal function. • Diuretic resistance may be improved by administering larger IV bolus doses, transi- tioning from IV bolus to continuous IV infusions, or adding a second diuretic with a different mechanism of action, such as a distal tubule blocker (eg, oral metolazone, oral hydrochlorothiazide, or IV chlorothiazide). Sequential nephron blockade with a loop and thiazide-type diuretic should generally be reserved for inpatients who can be mon- itored closely for development of severe electrolyte and intravascular volume depletion. Vasopressin Antagonists • Vasopressin receptor antagonists affect one or two AVP (antidiuretic hormone) receptors, V1A or V2. Stimulation of V1A receptors (located in vascular smooth muscle cells and myocardium) results in vasoconstriction, myocyte hypertrophy, coronary vasoconstriction, and positive inotropic effects. V2 receptors are located in renal tubules, where they regulate water reabsorption.