103 Heart Failure | CHAPTER 9 caution is required because crossreactivity has been reported. Angioedema occurs in approximately 1% of patients and is potentially life threatening; ACE inhibitors are contraindicated in patients with a history of angioedema. ACE inhibitors are contra- indicated in pregnancy due to various congenital defects. Angiotensin Receptor Blockers • The ARBs block the angiotensin II receptor subtype AT1, preventing the deleterious effects of angiotensin II on ventricular remodeling. Because they do not affect the ACE enzyme, ARBs do not affect bradykinin, which is linked to ACE inhibitor cough and angioedema. • Although ARBs are a guideline-recommended alternative in patients who are unable to tolerate an ACE inhibitor due to cough or angioedema, sacubitril/valsartan is preferred for ACE inhibitor-associated cough. Although numerous ARBs are avail- able, only candesartan, valsartan, and losartan are recommended in the guidelines because efficacy has been demonstrated in clinical trials. As with ACE inhibitors, initiate therapy with low doses and then titrate to target doses. Evaluate BP, renal function, and serum potassium within 1–2 weeks after starting therapy and after dosage increases, with these parameters used to guide subsequent dose changes. • ARBs are not suitable alternatives in patients with hypotension, hyperkalemia, or renal insufficiency due to ACE inhibitors because they are just as likely to cause these adverse effects. Careful monitoring is required when an ARB is used with another inhibitor of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone (RAAS) system (eg, ACE inhibitor or aldosterone antagonist) because this combination increases the risk of these adverse effects. Because ARBs do not affect bradykinin, they are not associated with cough and have a lower risk of angioedema than ACE inhibitors. Caution should be exercised when ARBs are used in patients with angioedema from ACE inhibitors because crossreactivity has been reported. Similar to ACE inhibitors, ARBs are contraindicated in pregnancy. Angiotensin Receptor–Neprilysin Inhibitor • Valsartan/Sacubitril is an ARNI approved to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death and hospitalization for HF in patients with NYHA class II–IV HF and reduced LVEF. Neprilysin is an enzyme that degrades bradykinin and other endogenous vasodila- tor and natriuretic peptides. By reducing neprilysin-mediated breakdown of these compounds, vasodilation, diuresis, and natriuresis are enhanced, and renin and aldosterone secretion is inhibited. • In patients with HFrEF, ARNI is preferred over either ACE inhibitors or ARBs to improve survival, slow disease progression, reduce hospitalizations, and improve quality of life. Patients receiving ACE inhibitors or ARBs can be switched to ARNI or ARNI can be used as initial treatment in patients with newly detected HFrEF without previous exposure to ACE inhibitors or ARBs. Discontinue ACE inhibitors 36 hours prior to initiating the ARNI; no waiting period is needed in patients receiving an ARB. The initial starting dose for most HFrEF patients is 49/51 mg sacubitril/valsartan twice daily and titrated to the target dose of 97/103 mg sacubitril/valsartan twice daily after 2–4 weeks (see Table 9-1). Closely monitor BP, serum potassium, and renal function after the start of therapy and after each titration step. • The most common adverse effects include hypotension, kidney dysfunction, and hyperkalemia. Angioedema is more common with sacubitril/valsartan than with enalapril (0.5% vs 0.2%, respectively). Sacubitril/valsartan is contraindicated in patients with a history of angioedema associated with an ACE inhibitor or ARB. It is also contraindicated in pregnancy and should not be used concurrently with ACE inhibitors or other ARBs. β-Blockers • β-Blockers antagonize the detrimental effects of the sympathetic nervous systems in HF and slow disease progression. β-Blockers reduce morbidity and mortalityin patients with HFrEF.