GeNeRAL meThoDs AssociATeD WiTh The PhyTochemicAL iNVesTiGATioN oF heRBAL PRoDUcTs 141 17 Uppsala), a cross-linked dextran used as a molecular sieve (gel filtra- tion), and ion exchangers. ‘Reversed-phase’ plates are now available commercially and are stated to be useful in that they will indicate the type of separation which a mixture would undergo by reversed-phase HPLC (q.v.). As with paper chromatography, the method can be extended to two- dimensional chromatography, to electrophoretic separations, to quanti- tative evaluations and to work involving radioactive substances. Compounds resolved on the TLC plate are visualized using either general or specific methods; thus, ultraviolet light will indi- cate fluorescent compounds (these should be examined in both long- (c. 365 nm) and short- (c. 263 nm) wavelength ultraviolet light. Fluorescence-quenching compounds (a very large number) are detected by the use of impregnated sorbents (see above). Iodine and Dragendorff’s reagents are used in the form of sprays for the gen- eral detection of alkaloids although they (iodine in particular) are not absolutely specific for alkaloids. For indole alkaloids, the reagent p-dimethylaminobenzaldehyde is useful for ergot and a phosphomo- lybdic acid reagent for others. Antimony trichloride in chloroform is used as a spray reagent for steroidal compounds and other terpen- oids, similarly anisaldehyde in sulphuric acid; both these require the sprayed chromatograms to be heated at 100°C for varying times (5–20 min) in order to develop the colours. Ammonia vapour can be used for free anthraquinone compounds and Fast Blue Salt B ‘Merck’ for cannabinoids and phloroglucides. Sugars separated by TLC using phosphate buffered amino layers (e.g. precoated plates of silica gel–Merck NH2) can be located by in­situ thermal reaction (150°C for 3–4 min.) and fluorescence monitoring. The European and British Pharmacopoeias employ thin-layer chro- matographic tests for most vegetable drugs; illustrations of the chromato- grams of the fatty acids derived from fifteen different fixed oils are given. Preparative TLC. As mentioned above, thicker layers of sorbent are employed for preparative work and the separated bands of compounds are scraped from the plate and subjected to solvent extraction. With modern spectrometric methods for structure-determination available, this technique generates quantities of material sufficient for a complete analysis. To speed up separations and to make them on-line for continuous recording, various modifications of preparative TLC have been devel- oped. These include centrifugally accelerated layer chromatogra­ phy and overpressure layer chromatography. The latter involves the complete covering of the sorbent layer with an elastic membrane under external pressure thus eliminating the vapour phase from the chromato- graphic plate. The mobile phase is forced up the sorbent layer through a special inlet. This method, introduced by Tyihák et al. in 1979–80, was subsequently adapted to on­line overpressure layer chromatogra­ phy for the preparative separation of a number of natural products (the isolation of frangula-emodin; noscapine and papaverine fractionation; furocoumarin isomers of Heracleum sphondylium (Umbelliferae); the preparation of the secoiridoid glycosides of Gentiana purpurea). See J. Pothier et al. (Fitoterapia, 1997, 68, 42) for the semi-prepara- tive isolation of the alkaloids of Strychnos nux­vomica, opium, Datura stramonium and Lupinus. Gas–liquid chromatography The use of a liquid stationary phase and a mobile gaseous phase in chromatography was first suggested by Martin and Synge in 1941 and developed by James and Martin in 1952 for the separation of the lower fatty acids. Gas–liquid chromatography is now extensively used in all branches of analytical chemistry. Many commercial instruments are available, the more sophisticated being completely automated. For a schematic diagram see Fig. 17.2. The empty columns are made of glass or metal and are either straight, often up to about 1.3 m in length, or coiled and up to 16 m in length. James and Martin used a tube of 4 mm internal diameter. The liquid stationary phase is held on an inert material, commonly partially fused diatomite. A uniform particle size, with a minimum of dust, is essential, for the inert support and the particles should be as small as possible to give a large surface area but sufficiently large to allow even packing of the column. The choice of stationary phase is governed by the temperature at which the column is to operate and the nature of the material to be fractionated; it should be non-volatile at the operating temperature and should not react with either the stationary and mobile phases or the solutes. Some materials commonly used, with their recommended temperature of operation, include: (1) non- polar compounds—silicone oils 200–250°C, apiezon oils and greases 275–300°C, silicone gum rubber 400°C, high-boiling-point paraf- fins such as mineral oil 100°C, squalene 75°C; (2) moderately polar compounds—high boiling point alcohols and their esters 100–225°C; (3) strongly polar compounds—polypropylene glycols and their esters 225°C. Up to 25% by weight of stationary phase is commonly employed on columns; one method of dispersing the stationary phase over the inert support is to dissolve it in a low boiling point solvent such as ether, mix thoroughly with the support and spread out the powder to allow the solvent to evaporate. The powder is then packed into the empty column a little at a time and as evenly as possible and then enclosed in a uniformly heated oven. Sample injection Carrier gas Controls for temperature programming, flow rate, etc. Oven Exit gas Differential detector (A + B) Amplifier and recorder Ancillary measurements on exit gas Mass spectra of selected fractions Radioactivity of exit gas A B Column fig. 17.2 schematic diagram of gas–liquid chromatograph with ancillary attachments.