905 Asthma | CHAPTER 79 noncholinergic (NANC) nervous system in the trachea and bronchi may amplify inflammation by releasing nitric oxide. CLINICAL PRESENTATION CHRONIC ASTHMA • Symptoms include episodes of shortness of breath, chest tightness, coughing (par- ticularly at night), wheezing, or a whistling sound when breathing. These often occur with exercise but may occur spontaneously or in association with known allergens. • Signs include expiratory wheezing (rhonchi) on auscultation; dry, hacking cough; and atopy (eg, allergic rhinitis or atopic dermatitis). • Asthma can vary from chronic daily symptoms to only intermittent symptoms. Inter- vals between symptoms may be days, weeks, months, or years. • Severity is determined by lung function, symptoms, nighttime awakenings, and inter- ference with normal activity prior to therapy. Patients can present with mild intermit- tent symptoms that require no medications or only occasional short-acting inhaled β2-agonists (SABAs) to severe chronic symptoms despite multiple medications. ACUTE SEVERE ASTHMA • Uncontrolled asthma can progress to an acute state in which inflammation, airway edema, mucus accumulation, and severe bronchospasm result in profound airway narrowing that is poorly responsive to bronchodilator therapy. • Patients may be anxious in acute distress and complain of severe dyspnea, shortness of breath, chest tightness, or burning. They may be able to say only a few words with each breath. Symptoms are unresponsive to usual measures (ie, SABAs). • Signs include expiratory and inspiratory wheezing on auscultation; dry, hacking cough; tachypnea; tachycardia; pallor or cyanosis; and hyperinflated chest with intercostal and supraclavicular retractions. Breath sounds may be diminished with severe obstruction. DIAGNOSIS CHRONIC ASTHMA • Diagnosis is made primarily by history of recurrent episodes of coughing, wheezing, chest tightness, or shortness of breath and confirmatory spirometry. • Patients may have family history of allergy or asthma or symptoms of allergic rhinitis or atopic dermatitis. History of exercise or cold air precipitating dyspnea or increased symptoms during specific allergen seasons suggests asthma. Patient may have exces- sive variability in twice-daily peak expiratory flows (PEF) over 2 weeks. • Spirometry demonstrates obstruction (forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1]/ forced vital capacity [FVC] <80%) with reversibility after inhaled β2-agonist admin- istration (at least 12% and 200 mL increase in FEV1). If baseline spirometry is normal, challenge testing with exercise, methacholine, or mannitol can be used to elicit BHR. ACUTE SEVERE ASTHMA • PEF and FEV1 are <40% of normal predicted values. Pulse oximetry reveals decreased arterial oxygen and O2 saturations. • Arterial blood gases may reveal metabolic acidosis and low partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2). • Obtain the history and physical examination while initial therapy is provided, assess- ing for onset and causes of the exacerbation; severity of symptoms and if associated with anaphylaxis; medication use, adherence, and response to current therapy; and risk factors for asthma-related death (history of near-fatal asthma requiring intuba- tion and mechanical ventilation, hospitalization or emergency care in the past year, recent use of oral corticosteroids, no current use of inhaled corticosteroids [ICS],