Anthracyclines The anthracycline antibiotics (Fig. 10.13) are characterized by a planar oxidized anthracene nucleus fused to a cyclo- hexane ring that is subsequently connected via a glycosidic linkage to an amino sugar. Initially discovered in the early 1960s when they were isolated from Streptomyces peucetius, hundreds of compounds belonging to this class have subsequently been discovered of which five are used clinically in the United States (doxorubicin, daunorubicin, idarubicin, epirubicin, and valrubicin). The conjugated sys- tems found in these molecules impart a red color, which is reflected in the name. Studies of the mechanism by which the anthracyclines ex- hibit their cytotoxic effects initially focused on the ability of the compounds to associate with DNA resulting from inter- calation of their planar ring system reinforced by auxiliary binding of the amino sugar. Subsequent work focused on the ability of these compounds to generate free radicals. Although free radical generation is thought to be important in the toxicity, it was not shown to occur in the nucleus and therefore not likely associated with their antiproliferative ef- fects. Currently, the accepted mechanism involves intercala- tion followed by inhibition of topoisomerase II resulting in strand breakage leading to apoptosis.72 The anthracyclines are considered specific for the S phase of the cell cycle. There is data to support increased binding of p53 with DNA when anthracyclines are administered, which would stimu- late the apoptotic process, although some studies have failed to confirm this.73,74 Several of these agents have been cocrys- tallized with B-DNA oligomers and the three-dimensional structure determined by x-ray crystallography. The general features show rings B and C intercalating between CpG base pairs and ring D protruding into the major groove. The sugar moiety lies within the minor groove and along with ring A is important for interaction and inhibition of topoisomerase II by stabilization of the cleavable complex. The amino sugar Chapter 10 Antineoplastic Agents 385 Figure 10.13 Structure of the anthracycline antibiotics.