560 SECTIOn Ix Special Topics (A) in the development of colorectal and other cancers. A num- ber of studies suggest that folic acid supplementation or food enrichment may reduce the risk of developing some cancers. However, there is also some evidence that folate supplements increase the rate of transformation of preneoplastic colorectal polyps into cancers, so that people with such polyps may be at increased risk of developing colorectal cancer if they have a high folate intake. Folic Acid Enrichment of Foods May put Some people at Risk Folic acid supplements will rectify the megaloblastic ane- mia of vitamin B12 deficiency but not the irreversible nerve damage seen in vitamin B12 deficiency. A high intake of folic acid can thus mask vitamin B12 deficiency. This is espe- cially a problem for elderly people, since atrophic gastritis that develops with increasing age leads to failure of gastric acid secretion, and hence failure to release vitamin B12 from dietary proteins. Because of this, although many countries have adopted mandatory enrichment of flour with folic acid to prevent neural tube defects, others have not. There is also antagonism between folic acid and some anticonvulsants used in the treatment of epilepsy, and, as noted above, there is some evidence that folate supplements may increase the risk of developing colorectal cancer among people with preneo- plastic colorectal polyps. DIETARY BIOTIN DEFICIENCY IS UNKNOWN The structures of biotin, biocytin, and carboxybiotin (the active metabolic intermediate) are shown in Figure 44–17. Biotin is widely distributed in many foods as biocytin (ε-amino-biotinyllysine), which is released on proteolysis. It is synthesized by intestinal flora in excess of requirements. Deficiency is unknown, except among people maintained for many months on total parenteral nutrition, and a very small number who eat abnormally large amounts of uncooked egg white, which contains avidin, a protein that binds biotin and renders it unavailable for absorption. provides a link between the functions of folate and vitamin B12. Impairment of methionine synthase in vitamin B12 deficiency results in the accumulation of methyltetrahydrofolate that can- not be used — the “folate trap.” There is therefore functional deficiency of folate, secondary to the deficiency of vitamin B12. Folate Deficiency Causes Megaloblastic Anemia Deficiency of folic acid itself or deficiency of vitamin B12, which leads to functional folic acid deficiency, affects cells that are dividing rapidly because they have a large requirement for thymidine for DNA synthesis. Clinically, this affects the bone marrow, leading to megaloblastic anemia. Folic Acid Supplements Reduce the Risk of neural Tube Defects & hyperhomocysteinemia, & May Reduce the Incidence of Cardiovascular Disease & Some Cancers Supplements of 400 μg/d of folate begun before conception result in a significant reduction in the incidence of spina bifida and other neural tube defects. Because of this, there is mandatory enrichment of flour with folic acid in many coun- tries. Elevated blood homocysteine is a significant risk factor for atherosclerosis, thrombosis, and hypertension. The con- dition is the result of an impaired ability to form methyltetra- hydrofolate by methylene-tetrahydrofolate reductase, causing functional folate deficiency, resulting in failure to remethylate homocysteine to methionine. People with an abnormal vari- ant of methylene-tetrahydrofolate reductase that occurs in 5% to 10% of the population do not develop hyperhomocystein- emia if they have a relatively high intake of folate. A number of placebo-controlled trials of supplements of folate (commonly together with vitamins B6 and B12) have shown the expected lowering of plasma homocysteine, but apart from reduced incidence of stroke there has been no effect on death from cardiovascular disease. There is also evidence that low folate status results in impaired methylation of CpG islands in DNA, which is a factor Serine Glycine Methionine Choline Histidine Sources of one-carbon units Synthesis using one-carbon units Methylene-THF Methenyl-THF Formimino-THF Formyl-THF Formate Purines CO2 Formyl-methionine Methyl-THF TMP + dihydrofolate DNA Serine FIGURE 44–16 Sources and utilization of one-carbon substituted folates. Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library