GeNeRAL meThoDs AssociATeD WiTh The PhyTochemicAL iNVesTiGATioN oF heRBAL PRoDUcTs 137 17 distillation); rose petals (product richer in relevant fragrance compounds com- pared with steam distillation); rose- mary (aroma more closely resembles plant fragrance than distilled oil); also studied: angelica root, celery, corian- der, Illicium verum, Maytenus illicifo­ lia, pimento For a review covering the extraction of flavour and fragrance compounds, see M. Gotto et al., Aroma research 2007, 8, 110 For additional information on the method, consult the ‘Further reading’. solid phase microextraction The method is suitable for some volatile oil-containing drugs. T. J. Betts (Planta Medica, 2000, 66, 193), using methyl polysiloxane solid phase microextraction fibres, has extracted the volatile oil from the headspace above fresh cut eucalyptus leaves (37° for 10 min.). The fibres were then desorbed at 200° for capillary gas chromatog- raphy of the oil. Not surprisingly, the oil composition differs from that of steam-distilled oils. The method, coupled with gas chroma- tography and mass spectrometry, has been recently employed for the analysis of the flowers and essential oils from Lavandula angusti­ folia cultivated in N.E. Italy (C. Da Porto and D. Decorti, Planta Medica, 2008, 74, 182). separation and isolation of constituents As the instrumentation for the structure elucidation of organic com- pounds becomes ever more effective, and allows the use of increas- ingly small amounts of material, the most difficult operation in phytochemical research becomes that of the isolation and purification of plant constituents. Although the chemical properties of functional groups and moieties contained in compounds such as acids, aldehydes, phenols and alkaloids can be exploited for their separation from other materials, such methods might not fractionate components of the same class; it is in this latter area that new techniques are constantly being developed. sublimation Sublimation may sometimes be possible on the whole drug, as in the isolation of caffeine from tea or for the purification of materials pres- ent in a crude extract. Modern equipment employs low pressures with a strict control of temperature. distillation Fractional distillation has been traditionally used for the separation of the components of volatile mixtures; in phytochemistry it has been widely used for the isolation of the components of volatile oils. On a laboratory scale it is not easy by this method to separate minor com- ponents of a mixture in a pure state and gas chromatography is now routinely used (q.v.). Steam distillation is much used to isolate volatile oils and hydro- cyanic acid from plant material. The TAS oven (see ‘Thin-layer chromatography’) involves steam distillation on a semi-micro scale for the direct transfer of volatile materials from a powdered drug to a thin-layer plate. fractional liberation Some groups of compounds lend themselves to fractional liberation from a mixture. As an example, a mixture of alkaloid salts in aqueous solution, when treated with aliquots of alkali, will give first the weak- est base in the free state followed by base liberation in ascending order of basicity. If the mixture is shaken with an organic solvent after each addition, then a fractionated series of bases will be obtained. A similar scheme can be used for organic acids soluble in water-immiscible sol- vents; in this case, starting with a mixture of the acid salts, it is possible to fractionally liberate the acids by addition of mineral acids. fractional crystallization A method much used in traditional isolations and still valuable for the resolution of often otherwise intractable mixtures. The method exploits the differences in solubility of the components of a mixture in a par- ticular solvent. Frequently, derivatives of the particular components are employed (picrates of alkaloids, osazones of sugars). adsorption chromatography Of the various methods of separating and isolating plant constituents, the ‘chromatographic procedure’ originated by Tswett is one of the most useful techniques of general application. The use of charcoal for the decolorization and clarification of solutions is well known; coloured impurities are adsorbed by the charcoal and a colourless solution results on filtration. All finely divided solids have the power to adsorb other substances on their surfaces to a greater or lesser extent; similarly, all substances are capable of being adsorbed, some much more readily than others. This phenomenon of selective adsorption is the fundamental prin- ciple of adsorption chromatography, the general process of which may be described with reference to one of Tswett’s original experiments. A light petroleum extract of green leaves is allowed to percolate slowly through a column of powdered calcium carbonate contained in a vertical glass tube. The pigmented contents of the solution are adsorbed on the substance of the column and undergo separation as percolation proceeds. The more strongly adsorbed pigments, xanthophyll and the chlorophylls, accumulate in distinct, characteristically coloured bands near the top of the column, while the less strongly adsorbed pigments, the carotenes, accumulate lower down. Frequently, complete separation of all the constituents into distinct bands does not result during the first ‘adsorption stage’, but the bands remain crowded together near the top of the column. Such a column may be developed by allowing more of the pure solvent to percolate through the column when the adsorbed materials slowly pass downwards and the separate bands become wider apart. In many cases the process may be rendered more efficient by the use of a different solvent, one from which the substances are less strongly adsorbed. If, for example, light petro- leum containing a little alcohol is percolated through the chromatogram obtained in the experiment described above, the bands become wider apart and pass down the column more rapidly than when pure light petroleum is used. As percolation continues, the lower bands reach the bottom of the column and disappear; the pigment is then obtained in the solution leaving the bottom of the column. This process of desorption is termed elution and the solution obtained is the eluate. It was from such classic experiments of Tswett on the separation of coloured compounds that the term ‘chromatography’ arose and it has remained to describe this method of fractionation although its applica- tion to colourless substances is now universal. Substances are more readily adsorbed from non-polar solvents such as light petroleum and benzene, while polar solvents—alcohol, water and pyridine, for example—are useful eluting media; many substances are adsorbed at one pH and eluted at another.