DRUGS THAT ALTER SODIUM & WATER BALANCE Dietary sodium restriction has been known for many years to decrease blood pressure in hypertensive patients. With the advent of diuretics, sodium restriction was thought to be less important. However, there is now general agreement that dietary control of blood pressure is a relatively nontoxic therapeutic measure and may even be preventive. Even modest dietary sodium restriction lowers blood pressure (though to varying extents) in many hypertensive persons. Mechanisms of Action & Hemodynamic Effects of Diuretics Diuretics lower blood pressure primarily by depleting body sodium stores. Initially, diuretics reduce blood pressure by reducing blood volume and cardiac output; peripheral vascular resistance may increase. After 6–8 weeks, cardiac output returns toward normal while peripheral vascular resistance declines. Sodium is believed to contribute to vascular resistance by increasing vessel stiffness and neural reactivity, possibly related to altered sodium­calcium exchange with a resultant increase in intracellular calcium. These effects are reversed by diuretics or dietary sodium restriction. Diuretics are effective in lowering blood pressure by 10–15 mm Hg in most patients, and diuretics alone often provide adequate treatment for mild or moderate essential hypertension. In more severe hypertension, diuretics are used in combination with sympathoplegic and vasodilator drugs to control the tendency toward sodium retention caused by these agents. Vascular responsiveness—ie, the ability to either constrict or dilate—is diminished by sympathoplegic and vasodilator drugs, so that the vasculature behaves like an inflexible tube. As a consequence, blood pressure becomes exquisitely sensitive to blood volume. Thus, in severe hypertension, when multiple drugs are used, blood pressure may be well controlled when blood volume is 95% of normal but much too high when blood volume is 105% of normal. Use of Diuretics The sites of action within the kidney and the pharmacokinetics of various diuretic drugs are discussed in Chapter 15. Thiazide diuretics are appropriate for most patients with mild or moderate hypertension and normal renal and cardiac function. Chlorthalidone may be more effective than hydrochlorothiazide since it has a longer duration of action yet a recent study has shown that hydrochlorothiazide was equally effective compared to chlorthalidone with respect to cardiovascular outcomes over time in people 65 years or older. More powerful diuretics (eg, those acting on the loop of Henle) such as furosemide, bumetanide, and torsemide are necessary in severe hypertension, when multiple drugs with sodium­retaining properties are used; in renal insufficiency, when glomerular filtration rate is less than 30–40 mL/min; and in cardiac failure or cirrhosis, in which sodium retention is marked. Recent studies indicate that chlorthalidone can be effective in lowering blood pressure even in patients with advanced chronic kidney disease. Potassium­sparing diuretics are useful both to avoid excessive potassium depletion and to enhance the natriuretic effects of other diuretics.