Qualitative detection of ketone bodies can be accomplished by nitroprusside tests (Acetest or Ketostix). Although these tests do not detect beta­ hydroxybutyric acid, which lacks a ketone group, the semiquantitative estimation of ketonuria thus obtained is nonetheless usually adequate for clinical purposes. Many laboratories now measure beta­hydroxybutyric acid, and meters are available (FORA meters; Nova Max Plus) for patient use that measure beta­hydroxybutyric acid levels in capillary blood glucose samples. Beta­hydroxybutyrate levels >0.6 mmol/L require evaluation. A level >3.0 mmol/L, which is equivalent to very high urinary ketones, will require hospitalization. E. Self­Monitoring of Capillary Blood Glucose Many blood glucose meters are available for measuring glucose from capillary blood samples. All are accurate, but they vary with regard to speed, convenience, size of blood samples required, reporting capability, and cost. Some meters are designed to communicate with an insulin pump. Providers and patients should be aware of the limitations of the blood glucose monitoring (BGM) systems. BGM strips have expiration dates; expired strips should not be used. Improper storage of strips (high temperature; open bottle) can affect their function. Conditions that impair the circulation to the fingers can artificially lower blood glucose measurements. When capillary glucose levels are measured at alternate sites such as the forearm, there can be a 5­ to 20­minute lag in glucose response on the arm with respect to the glucose response on the finger. For this reason, alternate­site testing should not be used when the glucose is rapidly changing (eg, postprandial or if hypoglycemia is suspected). F. Continuous Glucose Monitors These systems utilize a subcutaneous sensor that measures glucose concentrations in the interstitial fluid for 10–14 days. Studies show that pediatric and adult patients with type 1 diabetes who use continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) devices have improved glucose control without an increased incidence of hypoglycemia. The glucose data are transmitted wirelessly to smart phones and the screens of insulin pumps. There are directional arrows that indicate rate and direction of change of glucose levels, and alerts can be set for high and low glucose levels. The data from these CGM devices can be used to automatically deliver insulin by continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion pump (closed loop systems). MEDICATIONS FOR HYPERGLYCEMIA Insulin Preparations Human insulin is dispensed as regular (R) and neutral protamine hagedorn (NPH) formulations. There are also six analogs of human insulin. Three of the analogs are rapidly acting: insulin lispro, insulin aspart, and insulin glulisine; and three are long acting: insulin glargine, insulin detemir, and insulin degludec. Animal insulins are not available in the United States. Pork and beef preparations (isophane, neutral, 70/30, and lente) are still available in other parts of the world. Most insulins in the United States are available in a concentration of 100 units/mL (U100) and dispensed as 10­mL vials or 0.3­mL cartridges or prefilled disposable pens. Several insulins are also available at higher concentrations in the prefilled disposable pen form: insulin glargine 300 units/mL (U300); insulin degludec 200 units/mL (U200); insulin lispro 200 units/mL (U200); and regular insulin 500 units/mL (U500) (Tables 41–5, 41–6). TABLE 41–5 Summary of bioavailability characteristics of the insulins. Insulin Preparations Onset of Action Peak Action Effective Duration Insulins lispro, aspart, glulisine 5–15 min 1–1.5 h 3–4 h Human regular 30–60 min 2 h 6–8 h Technosphere inhaled insulin 5–15 min 1 h 3 h Human NPH 2–4 h 6–7 h 10–20 h Insulin glargine 0.5–1 h Flat ∼24 h