560 ANSEL'S PHARMAC EUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS and are designed to retain about 40% of the initial quantity of drug to provide for a constant delivery rate and a safety margin of an extra day's delivery of drug. I PARENTERAL ADMINISTRATION Long-Acting Parenteral Systems Extended rates of drug action following injection may be achieved in a number of ways, including the use of crystal or amorphous drug forms having prolonged dissolution char­ acteristics, slowly dissolving chemical complexes of the drug entity, solutions, or suspensions of drug in slowly absorbed carriers or vehicles ( e.g., oleaginous vehicle), large particles of drug in suspension, or injection of slowly eroding micro­ spheres of drug (7). The duration of action of the various forms of insulin, for example, is based in part on its physical form (amorphous or crystalline), complex formation with added agents, and dosage form (solution or suspension) (8). Matrix carrier systems based on biodegradable materi­ als for parenteral application have been examined as a potential means of delivering peptides and proteins (see "Gliadel Wafer Implant"). In such systems, a material such as purified insoluble collagen is used as a matrix that releases the drug contents through controlled diffusion and enzymatic matrix degradation. In addition to these means of achieving extended drug action, the rate and duration of drug delivery may be con­ trolled mechanically using controlled-rate drug infusion pumps. Examples of proprietary parenteral products hav­ ing long-acting features are presented in Table 20.3. Conventional parenteral products and methods of admin­ istration are discussed in Chapter 15. Liposomes Liposomes are composed of small vesicles of a bilayer of phospholipid encapsulating an aqueous space ranging from about 0.03 to 10 mm in diameter. They are com­ posed of one or many lipid membranes enclosing discrete aqueous compartments. The enclosed vesicles can encap­ sulate water-soluble drugs in the aqueous spaces, and lipid­ soluble drugs can be incorporated into the membranes. Liposomes can be administered parenterally, topically, by inhalation, and possibly by other routes of administration. Current products are administered parenterally. The following is an oversimplification but will serve to illustrate the preparation ofliposomes. Prepare a solution of a lipid (lecithin) in an organic solvent (acetone, chloroform) in a beaker. Allow the solvent to evaporate, leaving a thin film of the lipid on the walls of the container. Add an aqueous solution of the drug to the beaker and place it in an ultra­ sonic bath. As the lipid is displaced from the beaker walls, it forms spheres or cylinders, trapping the aqueous solution inside. The liposomes can be collected, sized, and used. Numerous configurations are possible for liposomes, including spheres and cylinders. Spherical liposomes can be unilamellar (only one layer) or multilamellar (many layers). They are often designated LUV (large unilamel­ lar vesicle), SUV (small unilamellar vesicle), and MLV (multilamellar vesicle). The smaller vesicles, or liposomes, generally range in size from 0.02 to 0.2 mm and the large vesicles from about 0.2 mm to more than 10 mm. The MLVs may have an onionskin structure of several layers. The phospholipids composing liposomes are amphipa­ thic, possessing both a hydrophilic or polar head and a hydrophobic or nonpolar tail. This is similar to the hydro­ philic-lipophilic balance (HLB) and wedge orientation theo­ ries of emulsification. The hydrophobic tail is composed of fatty acids containing generally 10 to 24 carbon atoms, and the polar end may contain phosphoric acid bound to a water­ soluble portion; the composition may vary considerably. Lecithin (phosphatidylcholine) is a backbone structure that has been studied extensively. When these phospholipids are exposed to water and line up, they do so in a manner that the fatty acid tails associate together as the lipophilic phase and the polar head groups associate toward the bulk water phase. Depending on the system and the water solubility of the drug, the drug may be in the aqueous compartments (if water soluble) or in the lipophilic bilayers (if oil soluble). TAB L E 20.3. Examples of Proprietary Extended Action Parenteral Products Product Bicillin C-R Injection (Monarch) Decadron-LA Sterile Suspension (Merck) Depo-Provera Contraceptive Injection (Pharmacia) Abelcet Amphotericin B Lipid Complex Injection (Enzon) Lupron Depot for Suspension (TAP Pharmaceuticals) IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous. Contents and Comments Contains penicillin G benzathine and penicillin G procaine, which have low solubility and are slowly released from IM injection sites. Hydrolyze to penicillin G. Hydrolysis plus slow absorption results in prolonged blood serum levels. Usual dose interval, 2-3 d Contains dexamethasone acetate, very insoluble ester of dexamethasone. Repository IM injection may be repeated as needed at 1-3 wk. Medroxyprogesterone acetate, water insoluble, in aqueous suspension. Single IM dose is repeated q3mo. Suspension of amphotericin B complexed with two phospholipids administered by IV infu­ sion qd Sterile lyophilized microspheres; mixed with diluent, form IM injection suspension q3-4 mo