CHAPTER 5 Dosage Form Design: Biopharmaceutical and Pharmacokinetic Considerations 149 (antianginal), testosterone (male hormone), oxybutynin (overactive bladder), methylphenidate (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder), rivastigmine (dementia), nico­ tine (smoking cessation), estradiol (estrogenic hormone), clonidine (antihypertensive), and scopolamine (antinau­ sea, anti-motion sickness). Each of these drugs is available for use in a transdermal delivery system fabricated as an adhesive disk or patch that slowly releases the medication for percutaneous absorption. Additionally, nitroglycerin is available in an ointment for application to the skin for systemic absorption. Nitroglycerin is used therapeutically for ischemic heart disease, with the transdermal dosage forms becoming increasingly popular because of the ben­ efit in patient compliance through their long-acting (24 hours) characteristics. The nitroglycerin patch is generally applied to the arm or chest, preferably in a hair-free or shaven area. The transdermal scopolamine system is also in the form of a patch to be applied to the skin, in this case behind the ear, for the prevention of nausea and vomiting associated with motion sickness. The commercial product is applied several hours before need (as prior to an air or sea trip), where it releases its medication over 3 days. The concepts of transdermal therapeutic systems are dis­ cussed further in Chapter 11. For the most part, pharmaceutical preparations applied to the skin are intended to serve some local action and as such are formulated to provide prolonged local contact with minimal absorption. Drugs applied to the skin for their local action include antiseptics, antifungal agents, anti-inflammatory agents, local anesthetic agents, skin emollients, and protectants against environmental con­ ditions, such as the effects of the sun, wind, pests, and chemical irritants. For these purposes, drugs are most commonly administered in the form of ointments and related semisolid preparations such as creams and pastes, as solid dry powders or aerosol sprays, or as liquid prepa­ rations such as solutions and lotions. Pharmaceutically, ointments, creams, and pastes are semisolid preparations in which the drug is contained in a suitable base (ointment base), which is itself semisolid and either hydrophilic or hydrophobic. These bases play an important role in the proper formulation of semisolid preparations, and there is no single base universally suit­ able as a carrier of all drug substances or for all therapeutic indications. The proper base for a drug must be deter­ mined individually to provide the desired drug release rate, staying qualities after application, and texture. Briefly, ointments are simple mixtures of drug substances in an ointment base, whereas creams are semisolid emulsions less viscid and lighter than ointments. Creams are con­ sidered to have greater esthetic appeal for their nongreasy character, ability to vanish into the skin upon rubbing, and ability to absorb serous discharges from skin lesions. Pastes contain more solid materials than do ointments and are therefore stiffer and less penetrating. Pastes are usually employed for their protective action. Thus, when protective rather than therapeutic action is desired, the formulation pharmacist will favor a paste, but when thera­ peutic action is required, he will prefer ointments and creams. Commercially, many therapeutic agents are pre­ pared in both ointment and cream form and are dispensed and used according to the particular preference of the patient and the prescribing practitioner. Medicinal powders are intimate mixtures of medicinal substances usually in an inert base such as talcum powder or starch. Depending on the particle size of the resulting blend, the powder will have varying dusting and cover­ ing capabilities. In any case, the particle should be small enough to ensure against grittiness and consequent skin irritation. Powders are most frequently applied topically to relieve such conditions as diaper rash, chafing, and athlete's foot. When topical application is desired in liquid form other than solution, lotions are most frequently employed. Lotions are emulsions or suspensions generally in an aqueous vehicle, although certain solutions have been designated as lotions because of either their appearance or application. Lotions may be preferred over semisolid preparations because of their nongreasy character and their increased spreadability over large areas of skin. Ocular, Oral, Otic, and Nasal Routes Drugs are frequently applied topically to the eye, ear, and mucous membranes of the nose, usually as ointments, suspensions, and solutions. Ophthalmic solutions and suspensions are sterile aqueous preparations with other ingredients essential to the safety and comfort of the patient. Ophthalmic ointments must be sterile and free of grit. Innovative new delivery systems for ophthalmic drugs continue to be investigated. One dosage form, the Ocusert, is an elliptical unit designed for continuous release of pilocarpine following placement in the cul-de-sac of the eye. Also, case reports of the ability of soft contact lenses to absorb drug from the eye have spawned research on soft contact lenses impregnated with drug. Most nasal preparations are solutions or suspensions administered by drops or as a fine mist. Research is directed toward the feasibility of nasal administration of insulin for diabetes mellitus. Ear preparations are usually viscid so that they have prolonged contact with the affected area. They may be employed simply to soften ear wax, to relieve an ear­ ache, or to combat an ear infection. Eye, ear, and nose preparations usually are not used for systemic effects, and although ophthalmic and otic preparations are not usually absorbed to any great extent, nasal preparations may be absorbed, and systemic effects after the intranasal applica­ tion of solution are fairly common. Other Routes The lungs provide an excellent absorbing surface for the administration of gases and for aerosol mists of very min­ ute particles of liquids or solids. The gas is usually oxygen, and the drugs are the common general anesthetics admin­ istered to patients entering surgery. The rich capillary area