TABLE 11–1 Blood pressure in adults. Blood Pressure (Systolic [mm Hg]/Diastolic [mm Hg] Low 70–90/40–60 Normal 90–120/60–80 Elevated 120–129/80 Hypertension Stage I 130–139/80–90 Stage II >140/>90 Epidemiologic studies indicate that the risks of damage to kidney, heart, and brain are directly related to the extent of blood pressure elevation. Even mild hypertension (blood pressure 130/80 mm Hg) increases the risk of eventual end­organ damage. Starting at 115/75 mm Hg, cardiovascular disease risk doubles with each increment of 20/10 mm Hg throughout the blood pressure range. Both systolic hypertension and diastolic hypertension are associated with end­organ damage; so­called isolated systolic hypertension is not benign. The risks—and therefore the urgency of instituting therapy —increase in proportion to the magnitude of blood pressure elevation. The risk of end­organ damage at any level of blood pressure or age is greater in African Americans and relatively less in premenopausal women than in men. Other risk factors include smoking, including exposure to secondhand smoke; diabetes; metabolic syndrome including obesity, dyslipidemia; physical inactivity; manifestations of end­organ damage at the time of diagnosis; and a family history of cardiovascular disease. It should be noted that the diagnosis of hypertension depends on measurement of blood pressure and not on symptoms reported by the patient. In fact, hypertension is usually asymptomatic until overt end­organ damage is imminent or has already occurred. Etiology of Hypertension A specific cause of hypertension can be established in only 10–15% of patients. Patients in whom no specific cause of hypertension can be found are said to have essential or primary hypertension. Patients with a specific etiology are said to have secondary hypertension. It is important to consider specific causes in each case, however, because some of them are amenable to definitive surgical treatment: renal artery constriction, coarctation of the aorta, pheochromocytoma, Cushing disease, and primary aldosteronism. In most cases, elevated blood pressure is associated with an overall increase in resistance to flow of blood through arterioles, whereas cardiac output is usually normal. Meticulous investigation of autonomic nervous system function, baroreceptor reflexes, the renin­angiotensin­aldosterone system, and the kidney has failed to identify a single abnormality as the cause of increased peripheral vascular resistance in essential hypertension. It appears, therefore, that elevated blood pressure is usually caused by a combination of several (multifactorial) abnormalities. Epidemiologic evidence points to genetic factors, psychological stress, environmental and dietary factors (increased salt and decreased potassium or calcium intake), alcohol consumption, and obesity as contributing to the development of hypertension. Increase in blood pressure with aging does not occur in populations with low daily sodium intake. Patients with labile hypertension appear more likely than normal controls to have blood pressure elevations after salt loading. The heritability of essential hypertension is estimated to be about 30%. Mutations in several genes have been linked to various rare causes of hypertension, but most hypertension appears to be polygenic. Functional variations of the genes for angiotensinogen, angiotensin­converting enzyme (ACE), the angiotensin II receptor, the β2 adrenoceptor, α adducin (a cytoskeletal protein), uromodulin (modulator of renal electrolyte transport), and others appear to contribute to some cases of essential hypertension.