552 SECTIOn Ix Special Topics (A) dietary source required. Its main function is in the regulation of calcium absorption and homeostasis; most of its actions are mediated by way of nuclear receptors that regulate gene expres- sion. It also has a role in regulating cell proliferation and dif- ferentiation. There is evidence that intakes considerably higher than are required to maintain calcium homeostasis reduce the risk of insulin resistance, obesity and the metabolic syndrome, as well as various cancers. Deficiency, leading to rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults, continues to be a problem in northern latitudes, where sunlight exposure is inadequate. Vitamin D Is Synthesized in the Skin 7-Dehydrocholesterol (an intermediate in the synthesis of cho- lesterol that accumulates in the skin) undergoes a nonenzymic reaction on exposure to ultraviolet light, yielding previtamin D (Figure 44–3). This undergoes a further reaction over a period of hours to form cholecalciferol, which is absorbed into the bloodstream. In temperate climates, the plasma concentration of vitamin D is highest at the end of summer and lowest at the end of winter. Beyond latitudes about 40° north or south, there is very little ultraviolet radiation of the appropriate wavelength in winter. Vitamin D Is Metabolized to the Active Metabolite, Calcitriol, in Liver & Kidney Cholecalciferol, either synthesized in the skin or from food, under- goes two hydroxylations to yield the active metabolite, 1,25-dihy- droxyvitamin D or calcitriol (Figure 44–4). Ergocalciferol from fortified foods undergoes similar hydroxylation to yield ercal- citriol. In the liver, cholecalciferol is hydroxylated to form the 25-hydroxy-derivative, calcidiol. This is released into the circula- tion bound to a vitamin D binding globulin, which is the main stor- age form of the vitamin. In the kidney, calcidiol undergoes either 1-hydroxylation to yield the active metabolite 1,25-dihydroxyvi- tamin D (calcitriol), or 24-hydroxylation to yield a probably inac- tive metabolite, 24,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (24-hydroxycalcidiol). Some tissues, other than those that are involved in calcium homeostasis, take up calcidiol from the circulation and synthe- size calcitriol that acts within the cell in which it was synthesized. Vitamin D Metabolism Is Both Regulated by and Regulates Calcium homeostasis The main function of vitamin D is in the control of calcium homeostasis, and in turn, vitamin D metabolism is regulated by factors that respond to plasma concentrations of calcium and phosphate. Calcitriol acts to reduce its own synthesis by inducing the 24-hydroxylase and repressing the 1-hydroxylase in the kidney. The principal function of vitamin D is to main- tain the plasma calcium concentration. Calcitriol achieves this in three ways: it increases intestinal absorption of calcium; it reduces excretion of calcium (by stimulating reabsorption in the distal renal tubules); and it mobilizes bone mineral. In addition, calcitriol is involved in insulin secretion, synthesis and secretion of parathyroid and thyroid hormones, inhibi- tion of production of interleukin by activated T-lymphocytes CH2 7-Dehydrocholesterol Thermal isomerization Cholecalciferol (calciol;vitamin D3) Previtamin D LIGHT HO OH HO CH3 FIGURE 44–3 The synthesis of vitamin D in the skin. Calcidiol-1-hydroxylase Calcitriol (1,25-hydroxycholecalciferol) Calciol-25-hydroxylase Calcidiol-1-hydroxylase HO OH OH HO HO CH2 Cholecalciferol (calciol;vitamin D3) CH2 CH2 Calcidiol (25-hydroxycholecalciferol) 24-hydroxycalcidiol OH OH Calcidiol-24-hydroxylase Calcidiol-24-hydroxylase Calcitetrol OH HO CH2 OH OH HO CH2 OH FIGURE 44–4 Metabolism of vitamin D. Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library