1Baroreceptor reflex Note that the drug treatment decreased the double product at the midpoint during exercise and prolonged the time to appearance of symptoms. (Data from Lindenberg BS, Weiner DA, McCabe CH, et al: Efficacy and safety of incremental doses of diltiazem for the treatment of stable angina pectoris. J Am Coll Cardiol 1983 Dec;2(6):1129­1133.) For maintenance therapy of chronic stable angina, β blockers, calcium channel­blocking agents, or long­acting nitrates may be chosen; the drug of choice depends on the individual patient’s response. In hypertensive patients, monotherapy with either slow­release or long­acting calcium channel blockers or β blockers may be adequate. In normotensive patients, long­acting nitrates may be suitable. The combination of a β blocker with a calcium channel blocker (eg, propranolol with nifedipine) or two different calcium channel blockers (eg, nifedipine and verapamil) has been shown to be more effective than individual drugs used alone. If a dihydropyridine is used, a longer­acting agent should be chosen (amlodipine or felodipine). If response to a single drug is inadequate, a drug from a different class should be added to maximize the beneficial reduction of cardiac work while minimizing undesirable effects (Table 12–7). Some patients may require therapy with all three drug groups. Addition of an ACE inhibitor may improve control of angina attacks. Ranolazine or ivabradine (off­label), combined with β blockers, may be effective in some patients refractory to traditional drugs. Most experts recommend coronary angiography and revascularization (if not contraindicated) in patients with stable chronic angina refractory to three­ drug medical treatment. In the future, agents such as allopurinol or perhexiline may be useful in patients who are not candidates for revascularization. TABLE 12–7 Effects of nitrates alone and with a blockers or calcium channel blockers in angina pectoris. Nitrates Alone Beta Blockers or Calcium Channel Blockers Alone Combined Nitrates with Beta Blockers or Calcium Channel Blockers Heart rate Reflex1 increase Decrease Decrease Arterial pressure Decrease Decrease Decrease End­diastolic volume Decrease Increase None or decrease Contractility Reflex1 increase Decrease None Ejection time Decrease1 Increase None