INSULIN Chemistry Human insulin is a small protein with a molecular weight of 5808 that contains 51 amino acids arranged in two chains (A and B) linked by disulfide bridges. There are species differences in the amino acids of both chains. Proinsulin, a long single­chain protein molecule, is processed within the Golgi apparatus of beta cells and packaged into granules, where it is hydrolyzed into insulin and a residual connecting segment called C­peptide by removal of four amino acids (Figure 41–1). FIGURE 41–1 Structure of human proinsulin (C­peptide plus A and B chains of insulin). Insulin is shown as the shaded (orange color) peptide chains, A and B. Differences in the A and B chains and amino acid modifications for the rapid­acting insulin analogs (aspart, lispro, and glulisine) and long­acting insulin analogs (degludec, detemir, and glargine) are discussed in the text. (Reproduced with permission from Gardner DG, Shoback D: Greenspan’s Basic & Clinical Endocrinology, 9th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2011.) Insulin and C­peptide are secreted in equimolar amounts in response to all insulin secretagogues; a small quantity of unprocessed or partially hydrolyzed proinsulin is released as well. Although proinsulin may have some mild hypoglycemic action, C­peptide has no known physiologic function. Granules within the beta cells store the insulin in the form of hexameric crystals consisting of two atoms of zinc and six molecules of insulin. The entire human pancreas contains up to 8 mg of insulin, representing approximately 200 biologic units. Originally, the unit was defined on the basis of the hypoglycemic activity of insulin in rabbits. With improved purification techniques, the unit is presently defined on the basis of weight, and present insulin standards used for assay purposes contain 28 units per milligram. Insulin Secretion Insulin is released from pancreatic beta cells at a low basal rate and at a much higher stimulated rate in response to a variety of stimuli, especially glucose. Other stimulants such as other sugars (eg, mannose), amino acids (especially gluconeogenic amino acids, eg, leucine, arginine), hormones such as glucagon­like polypeptide 1 (GLP­1), glucose­dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), glucagon, cholecystokinin, high concentrations of fatty acids, and β­adrenergic sympathetic activity are recognized. Stimulatory drugs include sulfonylureas, meglitinides, D­phenylalanine derivatives, isoproterenol, and acetylcholine. Inhibitory signals are hormones including insulin itself, islet amyloid polypeptide, somatostatin, and leptin; α­ adrenergic sympathetic activity; chronically elevated glucose; and low concentrations of fatty acids. Inhibitory drugs include diazoxide, phenytoin, vinblastine, clonidine, verapamil, and colchicine. One mechanism of stimulated insulin release is diagrammed in Figure 41–2. As shown in the figure, glucose is taken up by the beta cell through the transporter, GLUT2. Hyperglycemia results in increased intracellular ATP levels, which close ATP­dependent potassium channels. Decreased outward potassium efflux results in depolarization of the beta cell and opening of voltage­gated calcium channels. The resulting increased intracellular calcium triggers secretion of the hormone. The insulin secretagogue drug group (sulfonylureas, meglitinides, and D­phenylalanine derivatives) exhibit their glucose lowering effects through parts of this mechanism. FIGURE 41–2