PhyTochemisTRy 146 17 15N but that the same result is obtained by using standard mixtures of specifically labelled [14C]lysine and [15N]lysine. (Note: 15N is a stable isomer.) Extensive use has been made of 3H/14C ratios in the study of stereospecific hydrogen elimination reactions. Competitive feeding. If incorporation is obtained, it is still neces- sary to consider whether this is in fact the normal route of synthe- sis in the plant and not a subsidiary pathway, invoked as a result of the atypical availability to the plant of the administered compound. Competitive feeding experiments can be of value in determining which of two possible intermediates is normally used by the plant. In its sim- plest form, without taking into account a number of other factors, competitive feeding could distinguish whether B or B′ was the normal intermediate in the formation of C from A as below: Inactive B and B′ are fed with labelled A to separate groups of plants and a control is performed by feeding labelled A only to another group. If the incorporation of activity into C is inhibited in the plants receiv- ing B, but is unaffected in the group receiving B′, then we may con- clude that the pathway from A to C probably proceeds via B. In such experiments involving intact plants, the biological variation between normal plants is often so great that it is difficult to perform a con- trolled investigation. In comparative studies on the rates of demethyla- tion of codeine and unnatural codeine derivatives in Papaver orientale, Kirkby and colleagues in 1972 overcame this problem by using the same plant simultaneously as the control and as the test plant. They did this by administering to the plant a mixture of 3H-labelled codeine and 14C-labelled unnatural codeine derivative. The products of the conversion of both could be independently followed by their charac- teristic radiations, even when the metabolites produced were chemi- cally identical. (For the use of competitive feeding in the elucidation of the biogenesis of tropane alkaloids, see Beresford and Woolley, Phytochemistry, 1975, 14, 2209.) Administration of precursors. Negative results arising from feed- ing experiments must also be interpreted with caution; thus, the administered precursor may never have reached the necessary site of synthesis in the plant, or the plant may not, at the time of the experi- ments, have been synthesizing the constituent under investigation. Two examples of the latter situation which, until discovered, were the cause of misleading results in alkaloid studies were the cessation of horde- nine production in barley seedlings 15–20 days after germination and the restricted synthesis of hyoscine, as distinct from hyoscyamine, in old plants of Datura stramonium. Often, the actual weight of labelled material fed to the plant is extremely small and contamination of the solution by microorganisms, during infiltration, can lead to a loss, or even the complete disappear- ance, of the original compound. This situation is very likely to arise with infiltrations into non-sterile roots—it can, in some instances, be controlled by the use of broad-spectrum antibacterial agents. A number of methods can be employed to introduce labelled sub- stances into plants. Root feeding is particularly suited to plants which can be grown in hydroponic culture solution and which synthesize the compounds under investigation in the roots. Direct injection of pre- cursor solutions is sometimes possible; this is particularly applicable to plants with hollow stems (Umbelliferae) and to capsules (opium poppy). For the introduction of [1-13C]glucose solution into chamo- mile flowers K.-P. Adam and J. Zapp (Phytochemistry, 1998, 48, 953) used a microsyringe, injected into the hollow receptacle of the inflores- cence. With rigid tissues it is difficult to avoid a loss of solution from the site of injection by this method. Infiltrations can be made into rigid stems by using a wick consisting of a thread drawn through the stem and dipping into the labelled solution; alternatively, a flap can be cut in the stem and this dipped into the solution to be inflitrated. Sequential analysis. A second method of investigation with 14C is to grow plants in an atmosphere of 14CO2 and, by analysis of the plants at given time intervals, to obtain the sequence in which various related compounds become labelled. From the results obtained, certain biosynthetic routes may become apparent and others rejected. Here, again, degradation of the isolated radioactive compounds is important, because some units of the molecule may become labelled more rapidly than others. This method has been very successfully used in the eluci- dation of the path of carbon in photosynthesis and also for determining the sequential formation of the opium, hemlock and tobacco alkaloids. Exposure periods to 14CO2 as short as 5 min. have been used to obtain evidence of the biosynthetic sequence piperitone → (−)-menthone → (−)-menthol in Mentha piperita. In a number of instances the path- ways suggested by these experiments have been at variance with those obtained by feeding labelled intermediates; it would seem that the latter are therefore examples of non-obligatory intermediates. Use of stable isotopes. The stable isotopes 2H, 13C, 15N, and 18O, which have a low natural occurrence, can be used in the same way as radioactive elements for labelling compounds to be used as pos- sible intermediates in biosynthetic pathways. The usual methods of detection are mass spectroscopy (15N and 18O) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy (1H and 13C). It is the latter which is becoming of increasing significance for biosynthetic studies (the use of mass spectroscopy and NMR spectroscopy in biogenetic studies should not be confused with their extensive use in structural analysis of organic compounds). isolated orGans, tissues and cells The cultivation of isolated organs and tissues of plants eliminates inter- ference from other parts of the plant which may produce secondary changes in the metabolites. It can be used for feeding experiments in conjunction with labelled compounds and is also useful for the deter- mination of the site of synthesis of particular compounds. Isolated shoots of plants, when placed in a suitable solution or in water, will usually remain turgid for some days and during this time presumably have a normal metabolism; soon, however, a pathological metabolism commences. The technique can be refined by aseptically connecting the cut end of the shoot to a reservoir of suitable sterile nutrient, when the shoots will remain normal for much longer peri- ods. Such shoots often develop roots at the cut ends—a factor which could invalidate the results of an experiment. The technique has been recently (2007) used for the study of the biogenesis of hyperforin and adhyperforin in Hypericum performatum (q.v.). Isolated leaves can be similarly maintained. Rooted leaves have been used in stud- ies on Nicotiana and Datura. By this method a large quantity of root is obtained with a relatively small amount of aerial parts. It has the advantage that the nutrient solution requires no sugar, as sufficient starch is synthesized in the leaf and consequently bacterial and fun- gal growth in the nutrient solution is minimized. Petal discs have been used in the investigation of the biosynthesis of oil of rose. Isolated roots have been extensively used. Surface-sterilized seeds C A B B