mechanisms may then become susceptible to the action of the antineoplastics increasing the toxicity of the agents. DRUG CLASSES Alkylating Agents The alkylating agents are a class of drugs that are capable of forming covalent bonds with important biomolecules. The major targets of drug action are nucleophilic groups present on DNA (especially the 7-position of guanine); however, proteins and RNA among others may also be alkylated. Alkylation of DNA is thought to lead to cell death, although the exact mechanism is uncertain. Potential mechanisms of cell death include activation of apoptosis caused by p53 activation and disruption of the template function of DNA. In many cases, however, the cancer cells have dysfunctional p53 so that even though the cell has been unable to replicate DNA error free, cell death via apoptosis does not occur. In this way, cancer cells may become resistant to the effects of alkylating agents. Another possibility is that the cancer cells, like normal cells, have various mechanisms by which alkylated DNA bases can be excised. Disruption of the template function of DNA may have sev- eral effects. There are several potential nucleophilic sites on DNA, which are susceptible to electrophilic attack by an al- kylating agent (N-2, N-3, and N-7 of guanine, N-1, N-3, and N-7 of adenine, 0–6 of thymine, N-3 of cytosine). The most important of these for many alkylating agents is the N-7 posi- tion of guanine whose nucleophilicity may be enhanced by adjacent guanine residues. Alkylation converts the base to an effective leaving group so that attack by water leads to depuri- nation and the loss of genetic information if the resulting depurination is not repaired by the cell (Scheme 10.1). Additionally, alkylation has been proposed to result in altered base pairing away from the normal G-C: A-T hydrogen bonds because of alterations in tautomerization.4 The alkylation also leads to increased acidity of the N-1 nitrogen reducing the pKa from 9 to 7 to 8 giving rise to a zwitterionic form that may also mispair. For those agents that possess two reactive functionalities, both interstrand and intrastrand cross-linking becomes possible. When interstrand links occur, separation of the two strands during replication is prevented and therefore replication is blocked. Most of the currently used alkylating agents are nonse- lective regarding the sequence of DNA with which they react. Therefore, it is uncertain whether alkylation will lead to a cytotoxic event. Some alkylation reactions may lead to inconsequential results, and others may be easily repaired by the cell. Recent efforts have been directed at producing more sequence-selective alkylators that could be used at lower concentrations in an effort to reduce the significant side effects associated with this group of agents. The general mechanism for alkylation involves nucleo- philic attack by MNB, MNH2, MOH, MOMPO3H of DNA and RNA, while additional nucleophiles (MSH, COOH, etc.) present on proteins may also react (Scheme 10.2). Anion 358 Wilson and Gisvold’s Textbook of Organic Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry Scheme 10.1 Alkylation of guanine N-7 and subsequent depurination of DNA.