556 SECTIOn Ix Special Topics (A) and metabolic abnormalities predominate, without peripheral neuritis; and Wernicke encephalopathy with Korsakoff psychosis, which is associated especially with alcohol and narcotic abuse. The role of thiamin diphosphate in pyruvate dehydrogenase means that in deficiency there is impaired conversion of pyruvate to acetyl CoA. In subjects on a rela- tively high carbohydrate diet, this results in increased plasma concentrations of lactate and pyruvate, which may cause life- threatening lactic acidosis. Thiamin nutritional Status Can Be Assessed by Erythrocyte Transketolase Activation The activation of apo-transketolase (the enzyme protein) in erythrocyte lysate by thiamin diphosphate added in vitro has become the accepted index of thiamin nutritional status. VITAMIN B2 (RIBOFLAVIN) HAS A CENTRAL ROLE IN ENERGY- YIELDING METABOLISM Riboflavin provides the reactive moieties of the coenzymes flavin mononucleotide (FMN) and flavin adenine dinu- cleotide (FAD) (Figure 44–10). FMN is formed by ATP- dependent phosphorylation of riboflavin; FAD is synthesized by further reaction with ATP in which the AMP moiety is transferred onto FMN. The main dietary sources of riboflavin are milk and dairy products. In addition, because of its intense yellow color, riboflavin is widely used as a food additive. Flavin Coenzymes Are Electron Carriers in Oxidoreduction Reactions These include the mitochondrial respiratory chain, key enzymes in fatty acid and amino acid oxidation, and the citric acid cycle. Reoxidation of the reduced flavin in oxygenases and mixed- function oxidases proceeds by way of formation of the flavin rad- ical and flavin hydroperoxide, with the intermediate generation of superoxide and perhydroxyl radicals and hydrogen peroxide. Because of this, flavin oxidases make a significant contribution to the total oxidant stress in the body (see Chapter 45). Riboflavin Deficiency Is Widespread But not Fatal Although riboflavin is centrally involved in lipid and carbohy- drate metabolism, and deficiency occurs in many countries, it is not fatal, because there is very efficient conservation of tissue riboflavin. Riboflavin released by the catabolism of enzymes is rapidly incorporated into newly synthesized enzymes. Deficiency is characterized by cheilosis, desquamation and inflammation of the tongue, and a seborrheic dermatitis. Riboflavin nutritional status is assessed by measurement of the activation of eryth- rocyte glutathione reductase by FAD added in vitro. NIACIN IS NOT STRICTLY A VITAMIN Niacin was discovered as a nutrient during studies of pellagra. It is not strictly a vitamin since it can be synthesized in the body from the essential amino acid tryptophan. Two compounds, nicotinic acid and nicotinamide, have the biological activity of niacin; its metabolic function is as the nicotinamide ring of the coenzymes NAD and NADP in oxidation/reduction reactions (Figure 44–11). Some 60 mg of tryptophan is equivalent to 1 mg of dietary niacin. The niacin content of foods is expressed as mg niacin equivalents = mg preformed niacin + 1/60 × mg tryptophan Since most of the niacin in cereals is biologically unavailable, this is discounted. nAD Is the Source of ADp-Ribose In addition to its coenzyme role, NAD is the source of ADP-ribose for the ADP-ribosylation of proteins and polyADP-ribosylation of nucleoproteins involved in the DNA repair mechanism. Cyclic ADP-ribose and nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide, formed Riboflavin O CH2 CH OH CH OH CH OH O H3C H3C N N N N CH2OH FMN O CH2 CH OH CH OH CH OH O H3C H3C N N N N CH2 O O O P O FAD O OH OH CH2 CH OH CH OH CH OH O H3C H3C N N N N N N N N CH2 CH2 NH2 O O O O P O O O P O FIGURE 44–10 Riboflavin and the coenzymes flavin mononucleotide (FMn) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD). Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library