134 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS dispersion that can be pulverized and formed into tab­ lets or capsules. When this powder is placed in water, the water-soluble carrier rapidly dissolves, leaving the poorly soluble drug molecules enveloped in water, thus forming a solution. The use of micronized drugs is not confined to oral preparations. For example, ophthalmic and topical oint­ ments use micronized drugs for their preferred release characteristics and nonirritating quality after application. Because of the different rates and degrees of absorption obtainable from drugs of various particle sizes, products of the same drug substance prepared by two or more reli­ able pharmaceutical manufacturers may result in different degrees of therapeutic response in the same individual. A classic example of this occurs with phenytoin sodium cap­ sules, which have two distinct forms. The first is the rapid­ release type, that is, Prompt Phenytoin Sodium Capsules, USP, and the second is the slow-dissolution type, that is, Extended Phenytoin Sodium Capsules, USP. The former has a dissolution rate of not less than 85% in 30 minutes and is recommended for use three to four times per day. The latter has a slower dissolution rate, for example, 15% to 35% in 30 minutes, which lends itself to use in patients who can be dosed less frequently. Because of such dif­ ferences in formulation for a number of drugs and drug products, it is generally advisable for a person to continue taking the same brand of medication, provided it produces the desired therapeutic effect. Patients who are stabilized on one brand of drug should not be switched to another unless necessary. However, when a change is necessary, appropriate blood or plasma concentrations of the drug should be monitored until the patient is stabilized on the new product. Occasionally, a rapid rate of drug absorption is not desired in a pharmaceutical preparation. Research phar­ macists who wish to provide sustained rather than rapid action may employ agents of varying particle size to pro­ vide controlled dissolution and absorption. Summaries of the physicochemical principles of particle size reduction and the relation of particle size to surface area, dissolu­ tion, and solubility may be found in Physical Pharmacy Capsule 4.5. Crystal or Amorphous Drug Form Solid drug materials may occur as pure crystalline sub­ stances of definite identifiable shape or as amorphous particles without definite structure. The amorphous or crystalline character of a drug substance may be of con­ siderable importance to its ease of formulation and han­ dling, its chemical stability, and as has been recently demonstrated, even its biologic activity. Certain medicinal agents may be produced to exist in either a crystalline or an amorphous state. Because the amorphous form of a chemical is usually more soluble than is the crystalline form, different extents of drug absorption may result with consequent differences in the degree of pharmacologic activity obtained from each. Two antibiotic substances, novobiocin and chloramphenicol palmitate, are essen­ tially inactive when administered in crystalline form, but when they are administered in the amorphous form, absorption from the gastrointestinal tract proceeds rap­ idly, with good therapeutic response. In other instances, crystalline forms of drugs may be used because of greater stability than the corresponding amorphous forms. For example, the crystalline forms of penicillin G as the potas­ sium salt or sodium salt are considerably more stable than are the analogous amorphous forms. Thus, in formulation work on penicillin G, the crystalline forms are preferred and result in excellent therapeutic response. The hormone insulin presents another striking example of the different degree of activity that may result from the use of different physical forms of the same medicinal agent. Insulin is the active principle of the pancreas and is vital to the body's metabolism of glucose. It is indispensable in the treatment of patients with type 1 diabetes, who depend upon an external source of the hormone for survival. Prior to the development of insulin by the biosynthetic process using recombinant DNA technology, insulin was obtained for therapeutic use through its extraction and purification from animal pancreas glands, primarily pork. Today, the vast majority of insulin currently used world­ wide is biosynthetic recombinant "human" insulin and its analogs. Although the therapeutic use of insulin from animal origin is largely diminished, the discussion, which follows, remains important from the physical pharmacy standpoint. Insulin is a protein that forms an extremely insoluble zinc-insulin complex when combined with zinc in the presence of acetate buffer. The complex may be crystal­ line or amorphous, depending upon the pH of the buffer solution. Each form of the complex has been utilized in the formulation of insulin products to take advantage of the different absorption and retention rates follow­ ing injection. The amorphous form (or prompt insulin suspension) is rapidly absorbed following intramuscular or subcutaneous injection, whereas the larger crystalline form (extended insulin zinc suspension) is more slowly absorbed and has a longer retention time and duration of action. By combining the two types, 70% of the crystalline form and 30% of the amorphous form, an intermediate­ acting insulin product is prepared. Nowadays, different absorption and retention rates for insulin are achieved through analogs of human insulin developed though biotechnology. Some crystalline medicinal chemicals are capable of forming different types of crystals, depending on the con­ ditions (temperature, solvent, time) under which crystalli­ zation is induced. This property, whereby a single chemical substance may exist in more than one crystalline form, is polymorphism. Only one form of a pure drug substance is stable at a given temperature and pressure, with the other higher-energy forms, called metastable forms, converting in time to the stable crystalline form. It is therefore fairly