adverse effects include anemia, which might be due to a dilutional effect of increased plasma volume rather than a reduction in red blood cell mass. Weight gain occurs, especially when used in combination with a sulfonylurea or insulin. Some of the weight gain is fluid retention but there is also an increase in total fat mass. In preclinical trials, bladder tumors were observed in male rats on pioglitazone. Initial clinical reports indicated that this might also be true in humans. A 10­year observational cohort study of patients taking pioglitazone, however, failed to find an association with bladder cancer. A large multi­population pooled analysis (1.01 million persons over 5.9 million person­years) also failed to find an association between cumulative exposure of pioglitazone or rosiglitazone and incidence of bladder cancer. Another population­based study generating 689,616 person­ years of follow­up did find that pioglitazone but not rosiglitazone was associated with an increased risk of bladder cancer. Troglitazone, the first medication in this class, was withdrawn because of cases of fatal liver failure. Although rosiglitazone and pioglitazone have not been reported to cause liver injury, the drugs are not recommended for use in patients with active liver disease or pretreatment elevation of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 2.5 times greater than normal. Liver function tests should be performed prior to initiation of treatment and periodically thereafter. DRUGS THAT AFFECT ABSORPTION OF GLUCOSE The α­glucosidase inhibitors competitively inhibit the intestinal α­glucosidase enzymes and reduce post­meal glucose excursions by delaying the digestion and absorption of starch and disaccharides. Acarbose and miglitol are available in the United States. Voglibose is available in Japan, Korea, and India. Acarbose and miglitol are potent inhibitors of glucoamylase, α­amylase, and sucrase but have less effect on isomaltase and hardly any on trehalase and lactase. Acarbose has the molecular mass and structural features of a tetrasaccharide and very little is absorbed. In contrast, miglitol has structural similarity to glucose and is absorbed. Acarbose is initiated at a dosage of 50 mg twice daily just before the meal, with gradual increase to 100 mg three times a day. It lowers postprandial glucose levels by 30–50%. Miglitol therapy is initiated at a dosage of 25 mg three times a day. The usual maintenance dosage is 50 mg three times a day, but some patients may need 100 mg three times a day. The drug is not metabolized and is cleared by the kidney. It should not be used in renal failure. Prominent adverse effects of α­glucosidase inhibitors include flatulence, diarrhea, and abdominal pain and result from the appearance of undigested carbohydrate in the colon that is then fermented into short­chain fatty acids, releasing gas. These adverse effects tend to diminish with ongoing use because chronic exposure to carbohydrate induces the expression of α­glucosidase in the jejunum and ileum, increasing distal small intestine glucose absorption and minimizing the passage of carbohydrate into the colon. Although not a problem with monotherapy or combination therapy with a biguanide, hypoglycemia may occur with concurrent insulin secretagogue treatment. Hypoglycemia should be treated with glucose (dextrose) and not sucrose, whose breakdown may be blocked. An increase in hepatic aminotransferases has been noted in clinical trials with acarbose, especially with dosages greater than 300 mg/d. The abnormalities resolve on stopping the drug. These drugs are infrequently prescribed in the United States because of their prominent gastrointestinal adverse effects and relatively modest glucose­lowering benefit. DRUGS THAT MIMIC INCRETIN EFFECT OR PROLONG INCRETIN ACTION An oral glucose load provokes a higher insulin response compared with an equivalent dose of glucose given intravenously. This is because the oral glucose causes a release of gut hormones (“incretins”), principally GLP­1 and glucose­dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP), that amplify the glucose­induced insulin secretion. When GLP­1 is infused in patients with type 2 diabetes, it stimulates insulin release and lowers glucose levels. The GLP­1 effect is glucose­dependent in that the insulin release is more pronounced when glucose levels are elevated but less pronounced when glucose levels are normal. For this reason, GLP­1 has a lower risk for hypoglycemia than the sulfonylureas. In addition to its insulin stimulatory effect, GLP­1 has a number of other biologic effects. It suppresses glucagon secretion, delays gastric emptying, and reduces apoptosis of human islets in culture. In animals, GLP­1 inhibits feeding by a central nervous system mechanism. Patients with type 2 diabetes on GLP­1 therapy are less hungry. It is unclear whether this is mainly related to the deceleration of gastric emptying or whether there is a central nervous system effect as well. GIP, like GLP­1, potentiates glucose­dependent insulin secretion. GLP­1 is rapidly degraded by dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP­4) and by other enzymes such as endopeptidase 24.11 and is also cleared by the kidney. The native peptide therefore cannot be used therapeutically. One approach to this problem was to develop metabolically stable analogs or derivatives of GLP­1 that are not subject to the same enzymatic degradation or renal clearance. Five GLP­1 receptor agonists—dulaglutide, exenatide (and exenatide XR), liraglutide, lixisenatide, and semaglutide—are available for clinical use.The other approach was to develop inhibitors of DPP­4 and prolong the