Another example of how prodrug design can significantly alter biodistribution and biological half-life is illustrated by two drugs based on the retinoic acid structure used systemi- cally to treat psoriasis, a nonmalignant hyperplasia. Etretinate has a 120-day terminal half-life after 6 months of therapy. In contrast, the active metabolite, acitretin, has a 33- to 96-hour terminal half-life. Both drugs are potentially teratogenic. Women of childbearing age must sign statements that they are aware of the risks and usually are administered a preg- nancy test before a prescription is issued. Acitretin, with its shorter half-life, is recommended for a woman who would like to become pregnant, because it can clear her body within a reasonable time frame. When effective, etretinate can keep a patient clear of psoriasis lesions for several months. Protein Binding Once the drug enters the systemic circulation (Fig. 2.1), it can undergo several events. It may stay in solution, but many drugs will be bound to the serum proteins, usually al- bumin (Rx. 2.2). Thus, a new equilibrium must be consid- ered. Depending on the equilibrium constant, the drug can remain in systemic circulation bound to albumin for a con- siderable period and not be available to the sites of biotrans- formation, the pharmacological receptors, and excretion. (Rx. 2.2) Protein binding can have a profound effect on the drug’s effective solubility, biodistribution, half-life in the body, and interaction with other drugs. A drug with such poor water solubility that therapeutic concentrations of the un- bound (active) drug normally cannot be maintained still can be a very effective agent. The albumin–drug complex acts as a reservoir by providing large enough concentrations of free drug to cause a pharmacological response at the receptor. Protein binding may also limit access to certain body compartments. The placenta is able to block passage of pro- teins from maternal to fetal circulation. Thus, drugs that nor- mally would be expected to cross the placental barrier and possibly harm the fetus are retained in the maternal circula- tion, bound to the mother’s serum proteins. Protein binding also can prolong the drug’s duration of ac- tion. The drug–protein complex is too large to pass through the renal glomerular membranes, preventing rapid excretion of the drug. Protein binding limits the amount of drug avail- able for biotransformation (see later in this chapter and Chapter 3) and for interaction with specific receptor sites. For 6 Wilson and Gisvold’s Textbook of Organic Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry