CHAPTER 5 Dosage Form Design: Biopharmaceutical and Pharmacokinetic Considerations 143 TABLE 5.4. Routes of Drug Administration Term Oral Per ora I (per osa) Sublingual Parenteral Intravenous Intra-arterial lntracardiac lntraspinal or intrathecal Intra osseous Intra-articular lntrasynovial Site Mouth Gastrointestinal tract via mouth Under the tongue Other than the gastrointestinal tract (by injection) Vein Artery Heart Spine Bone Joint Joint fluid area lntracutaneous, intradermal Skin Subcutaneous Beneath the skin Intramuscular Muscle Epicutaneous (topical) Skin surface Transdermal Skin surface Conjunctiva! Conjunctiva lntraocular Eye Intranasal Nose Aural Ear Intra respiratory Lung Rectal Rectum Vaginal Vagina 'The abbreviation PO is commonly used on prescriptions to indicate oral administration. may be placed directly in the bloodstream via intravenous injection or absorbed into the venous circulation following oral or other route of administration. An individual drug substance may be formulated into multiple dosage forms that result in different drug absorp­ tion rates and times of onset, peak, and duration of action. Figure 5.10 and Table 5.6 demonstrate this for the drug nitroglycerin in various dosage forms. The sublingual, intravenous, and buccal forms present extremely rapid onsets of action, whereas the oral (swallowed), topical ointment, and topical patch present slower onsets of action but greater durations of action. The patch provides the longest duration of action, up to 14 hours following application of a single patch to the skin. The transdermal nitroglycerin patch allows a single daily dose, whereas the other forms require multiple dosing to maintain drug lev­ els within the therapeutic window. The difference in absorption between dosage forms is a function of the formulation and the route of adminis­ tration. For example, a problem associated with the oral administration of a drug is that once absorbed through the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract into the portal vein, the drug may pass directly to the liver and undergo the TABLE 5.5. Route of Administration and Delivery System of Primary Dosage Forms ORAL SUB LINGUAL PARENTERAL EPICUTANEOUS, TRANSDERMAL CONJUNCTIVAL INTRAOCULAR, INTRA-AURAL INTRANASAL INTRARESPIRATORY RECTAL VAGINAL URETHRAL Tablets Capsules Solutions Syrups Elixirs Suspensions Magmas Gels Powders Tablets Troches, lozenges Drops (solutions) Solutions Suspensions Ointments, gels Creams Infusion pumps Pastes Plasters Powders Aerosols Lotions Transdermal patches, disks, solutions Contact lens inserts Ointments Solutions Suspensions Solutions Sprays Inhalants Ointments Aerosols Solutions Ointments Suppositories Gels Solutions Ointments Emulsion foams Gels Tablets Inserts, suppositories, sponge Solutions Suppositories