Chapter 10 Antineoplastic Agents 401 Scheme 10.30 Alkylation of DNA by mitomycin C. TABLE 10.3 Growth Factors and Receptors of Paracrine Origin Growth Factor Designation Receptor Epidermal growth EGF EGF-R factor Platelet-derived PDGF PDGF-R growth factor Nerve growth factor NGF Trk Vascular endothelial VEGF VEGF-R growth factor Stem cell factor SCF Kit Glial cell line–derived GFL RET neurotropic factor It was realized early on that the growth and proliferation of many tissues was under the control of the endocrine system, in which endocrine glands secreted hormones and that hormones or their antagonists were useful in controlling the overgrowth of these tissues. It was found later that other growth factors, many of which were secreted by nearby cells, were also involved in controlling the growth and pro- liferation of the target tissue and this became known as paracrine control. Many of these growth factors have been identified and several along with their receptors are indi- cated in Table 10.3.144 These receptors have become targets for several different monoclonal antibodies that have been recently introduced. Further work identified the pathways by which interac- tion with these cell surface receptors resulted in growth and proliferation of cells. There are various mechanisms by which these processes occur, but a generalized pathway in- volves interaction of a growth factor with a growth factor receptor occurring as a monomer present in the phospho- lipid bilayer of the cell membrane, which results in dimer- ization of the receptors (Scheme 10.31). The receptors themselves possess an extracellular-binding domain for in- teraction with the growth factors, an intracellular domain, and a connecting transmembrane region. The intracellular domain of these receptor proteins often function as kinases, many of which are TKs that phosphorylate residues on the other monomer receptor. The resulting phosphorylated residues are recognized by the Src homology 2 domain (SH2) of cytoplasmic proteins such as Shc, Grb-2, and Sos, which activate Ras. These cytoplasmic proteins then serve to transmit the growth signals from the growth factor recep- tors to Ras (Fig. 10.25). Ras is a G protein tethered to the cytoplasmic membrane, which may bind GTP resulting in activation of Ras or bind GDP resulting in Ras inactivation. Ras also normally has the ability to hydrolyze GTP to inac- tivate itself. Many cancers are found to have altered forms of Ras, which is present in a hyperactive state. Ras, in its activated form activates a series of kinases, many of which are TKs with various effects on cells. Notable is the Ras- Raf-MEK-ERK pathway also known as the mitogen- activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. This is a