904 CHAPTER 79 Asthma • Asthma is defined by the Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) as a heterogeneous disease usually characterized by chronic airway inflammation. It is defined by a his- tory of respiratory symptoms such as wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, and cough that vary over time and in intensity, together with variable expiratory airflow limitation. PATHOPHYSIOLOGY • Numerous inflammatory cells and mediators cause chronic airway inflammation that leads to expiratory airway limitation. Airway narrowing results from smooth muscle contraction, with remodeling due to structural changes and airway plugging by mucous hypersecretion that leads to wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tight- ness, and cough. • Bronchial hyperresponsiveness (BHR) is a heightened response to a stimulus (eg, cat dander) that enhances susceptibility to airway narrowing. • Allergen inhalation in allergic patients causes an early-phase allergic reaction (within minutes) with activation of cells bearing allergen-specific immunoglobulin E (IgE). After rapid activation, airway mast cells and macrophages release proinflammatory mediators such as histamine and eicosanoids that induce contraction of airway smooth muscle, mucus secretion, edema, and exudation of plasma in the airways. Plasma protein leakage induces a thickened, engorged, edematous airway wall and narrowing of lumen with reduced mucus clearance. • A late-phase inflammatory reaction occurs 6–9 hours after allergen provocation and involves recruitment and activation of eosinophils, T lymphocytes, basophils, neutrophils, and macrophages. • Bronchial epithelial cells release cytokines such as eicosanoids, peptidases, matrix proteins, periostin, cytokines, chemokines, and nitric oxide (NO). Epithelial shed- ding may heighten BHR and enhance airway sensitivity to provocative stimuli. • Eosinophils migrate to airways and release inflammatory mediators such as leukotri- enes and granule proteins that injure airway tissue. • T-lymphocyte activation leads to release of cytokines from type 2 T-helper (TH2) cells that mediate allergic inflammation (interleukin [IL]-4, IL-5, and IL-13). Conversely, type 1 T-helper (TH1) cells produce IL-2 and interferon-γ which are essential for cel- lular defense mechanisms. Allergic asthmatic inflammation may result from imbal- ance between TH1 and TH2 cells. • Mast cell degranulation results in release of mediators such as histamine; eosinophil and neutrophil chemotactic factors; leukotrienes C4, D4, and E4; prostaglandins; and platelet-activating factor (PAF). Histamine can induce smooth muscle constriction and bronchospasm and may contribute to mucosal edema and mucus secretion. • Alveolar macrophages release inflammatory mediators, including proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines, reactive oxygen species, and eicosanoids. Produc- tion of neutrophil chemotactic factor and eosinophil chemotactic factor furthers the inflammatory process. Neutrophils also release mediators (PAFs, prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes) that contribute to BHR and airway inflammation. Leukotrienes C4, D4, and E4 are released during inflammatory processes in the lung and produce bronchospasm, mucus secretion, microvascular permeability, and air- way edema. • The airway smooth muscle is innervated by parasympathetic, sympathetic, and nonadrenergic inhibitory nerves. Normal resting tone of airway smooth muscle is maintained by vagal efferent activity, and bronchoconstriction can be mediated by vagal stimulation in small bronchi. Airway smooth muscle contains noninner- vated β2-adrenergic receptors that produce bronchodilation. The nonadrenergic,