insulin, but this combination is associated with more weight gain and peripheral and macular edema. Continuing with sulfonylureas, GLP­1 receptor agonists, DPP­4 inhibitors, and SGLT2 inhibitors can be of benefit in selected patients. Cost, complexity, and risk for adverse events should be considered when deciding which drugs to continue once the patient starts on insulin therapy. Acute Complications of Diabetes A. Hypoglycemia Hypoglycemic reactions are the most common complication of insulin therapy. It can also occur in any patient taking oral agents that stimulate insulin secretion (eg, sulfonylureas, meglitinide, D­phenylalanine analogs), particularly if the patient is elderly, has renal or liver disease. It occurs more frequently with the use of long­acting sulfonylureas. Rapid development of hypoglycemia in persons with intact hypoglycemic awareness causes signs of autonomic hyperactivity—both sympathetic (tachycardia, palpitations, sweating, tremulousness) and parasympathetic (nausea, hunger)—and may progress to convulsions and coma if untreated. In patients exposed to frequent hypoglycemic episodes during tight glycemic control, autonomic warning signals of hypoglycemia are less common or even absent. This dangerous acquired condition is termed hypoglycemic unawareness. When patients lack the early warning signs of low blood glucose, they may not take corrective measures in time. In patients with persistent, untreated hypoglycemia, the manifestations of insulin excess may develop—confusion, weakness, bizarre behavior, coma, seizures—at which point they may not be able to procure or safely swallow glucose­containing foods. Hypoglycemic awareness may be restored by preventing frequent hypoglycemic episodes. An identification bracelet, necklace, or card in the wallet or purse, as well as some form of rapidly absorbed glucose, should be carried by every diabetic person who is receiving hypoglycemic drug therapy. All the manifestations of hypoglycemia are relieved by glucose administration. To expedite absorption, simple sugar or glucose should be given, preferably in liquid form. To treat mild hypoglycemia in a patient who is conscious and able to swallow, dextrose tablets, glucose gel, or any sugar­ containing beverage or food may be given. If more severe hypoglycemia has produced unconsciousness or stupor, the treatment of choice is 1 mg of glucagon injected either subcutaneously or intramuscularly or 3 mg of intranasal glucagon for adults. This may restore consciousness within 15 minutes to permit ingestion of sugar. Emergency medical services should be called in the event of loss of consciousness. The emergency personnel can restore consciousness by giving 20–50 mL of 50% glucose solution by intravenous bolus over a period of 2–3 minutes. B . Diabetic Coma 1. Diabetic ketoacidosis Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a life­threatening medical emergency caused by inadequate or absent insulin replacement, which occurs in people with type 1 diabetes and infrequently in those with type 2 diabetes. It typically occurs in newly diagnosed type 1 patients or in those who have experienced interrupted insulin replacement, and rarely in people with type 2 diabetes who have concurrent unusually stressful conditions such as sepsis or pancreatitis or are on high­dose steroid therapy. DKA occurs more frequently in patients on insulin pumps. Poor adherence—either for psychological reasons or because of inadequate education—is one of the most common causes of DKA, particularly when episodes are recurrent. Cases of euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis have been reported with the off­label use of SGLT2 inhibitors in patients with type 1 diabetes and in type 2 patients who are probably quite insulin deficient. Signs and symptoms include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, deep slow (Kussmaul) breathing, change in mental status (including coma), elevated blood and urinary ketones and glucose, an arterial blood pH lower than 7.3, and low bicarbonate (15 mmol/L). The fundamental treatment for DKA includes aggressive intravenous hydration and insulin therapy and maintenance of potassium and other electrolyte levels. Fluid and insulin therapy is based on the patient’s individual needs and requires frequent reevaluation and modification. Close attention must be given to hydration and renal status, sodium and potassium levels, and the rate of correction of plasma glucose and plasma osmolality. Fluid therapy generally begins with normal saline. Regular human insulin should be used for intravenous therapy with a usual starting dosage of about 0.1 U/kg/h. 2. Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic syndrome Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic syndrome (HHS) is diagnosed in persons with type 2 diabetes and is characterized by profound hyperglycemia and