GeNeRAL meThoDs AssociATeD WiTh The PhyTochemicAL iNVesTiGATioN oF heRBAL PRoDUcTs 143 17 (1), Wall-coated open tubular (WCOT) columns have the inner wall of the tube coated with stationary phase up to about 1 μm in thickness. Greater thickness leads to column bleeding in which the stationary phase moves down the column and eventually leaks into the detector. Thicker layers, and hence increased sample capacity, can be achieved with sil- ica columns having specially bonded phases. WCOT columns have the highest efficiency but a low sample capacity. (2), Support-coated open tubular (SCOT) columns have the inner wall lined with a thin layer of support material coated with immobile phase. This has the effect of increasing the available area of immobile phase, affording the column a greater load capacity. The efficiency, while lower than that of the WCOT columns is much higher than that for packed columns. (3) Micropacked columns involve a coated support packed into narrow-bore columns. In all ways they represent a compromise, being more efficient than the nor- mal packed columns but having the same problem in that column length is restricted by the high back-pressure. Another difference between capillary column chromatography and standard gas chromatography concerns the method of introducing the sample to the column. The volume of sample dissolved in solvent for analysis by the capillary method is too small for a microsyringe and so special injection heads are necessary which either split the sample (e.g. 25:1 with the smaller portion passing to the column) or are of the so-called splitless-injector type which are able to accommodate the relatively large volume of solvent and deliver the dissolved solute to the column. As with other chromatographic techniques (see HPLC) the introduc- tion of chiral stationary phases has given an added dimension to gas chromatography. Examples include the separation of the two enantio- mers of linalool enabling the detection of reconstituted bergamot oil in the genuine oil (A. Cotroneo et al., Flavour Frag. J., 1992, 7, 15) and the detection of added reconstituted lemon oil in the genuine cold-pressed essential oil (G. Dugo et al., J. Essent. Oil Res., 1993, 5, 21). Some vola- tile oils of the Pharmacopoeia are tested for chiral purity (q.v). Gel filtration chromatography, gel permeation chromatography (molecular sieves) These techniques are used for the separation of substances in solu- tion according to their molecular size. The former refers to the use of aqueous mobile phases and the latter to organic mobile phases. Hydrophilic gels such as those prepared from starch, agar, agarose (a component of agar), polyacrylamide, polyvinylcarbitol and cross-linked dextrans have been used for the fractionation of proteins, peptides, amino acids and polysaccharides. The particles of these gels possess pores formed by the molecular structure of the gel, and when packed into a column and percolated with a solution, they permit large molecules of solute, which do not enter the pores, to pass rapidly down the column with the solvent via the intergranular interstices. Conversely, small molecules which are able to enter the gel pores become evenly distributed (on equilibrium) across the column and pass more slowly down its length. Thin layers of the sorbent can be used as in TLC. The dextran gels (Sephadex) are formed by cross-linking dextrans (polymers of glucose in which linkages are almost entirely of the 1,6-α type) with α-epichlorohydrin (Fig. 17.3). Individual pore sizes are determined by the distance apart of the cross-links, and gels covering a molecular weight range of up to about 200 000 are produced. Each gel type possesses a range of pore sizes, so that below the size limit of complete exclusion of the large molecules, different-sized solute molecules will enter the gel to a greater or lesser extent and so will vary in their elution rates. Similar principles are involved in the use of controlled-pore glass as sorbent; this gives a rigid column with continuous uniform pores. Obviously, the method is most applicable to mixtures containing large molecules of various sizes and to the separation of large molecules from small ones (as in desalting operations on partially hydrolysed proteins). The technique is important in DNA analysis for the separation of those fragments that result from the treatment of DNA with specific restriction enzymes. Under the heading ‘Size-exclusion chromatography’, the Phar­ macopoeia also uses rigid supports as packing material for columns; these may consist of glass, silica or a solvent-compatible cross-linked organic polymer. Size-exclusion chromatography is used for the determination of those smaller fatty acids (oligomers) that need to be limited in fish oils, such as Fish Oil, Rich in Omega-3-Acids BP/EP, (oligomers, maximum 1.5%). electrochromatography For the electrophoretic separation of mixtures, a filter-paper strip is impregnated with a solution of an electrolyte (usually a buffer solu- tion) and supported in the centre; its two ends are dipped into solutions in which electrodes are immersed. A spot of the material to be fraction- ated is placed on the paper, the whole apparatus sealed and a potential difference of about 2–10 volts per centimetre applied along the paper. Some separations are carried out at much higher voltages than the above. According to the nature of the charge on the ions of the solute mixture, the solutes will move towards either the anode or the cathode. Thus, the amino acids can be separated either into groups (acid group, neutral group, basic group) or into individual amino acids. The migra- tion velocity for a given substance depends on the magnitude of the ionic charge and the size and shape of the particular molecule. If pref- erable, paper can be replaced by thin layers of the gels described under ‘Gel filtration’, above. Many alkaloidal mixtures have been separated by this method and also plant acids, the component sugars of cardiac glycosides and anthraquinone derivatives. O CH2 CH2 O Gluc. Cross-link of gel a-Epichlorohydrin Dextran units Gluc. Gluc. C H OH CH2 CH2CI CH O Gluc. Gluc. Gluc. + Gluc. Gluc. Gluc. Gluc. Gluc. Gluc. fig. 17.3 Formation of dextran gels.