CHApTEr 43 Nutrition, Digestion, & Absorption 539 (micelles, 4-6 nm in diameter) before they can be absorbed. The fat-soluble vitamins, A, D, E, and K, and a variety of other lipids (including cholesterol and carotenes) are absorbed dissolved in the lipid micelles. Absorption of carotenes and fat-soluble vitamins is impaired on a very low fat diet. Hydrolysis of triacylglycerols is initiated by lingual and gastric lipases, which attack the sn-3 ester bond forming 1,2-diacylglycerols and free fatty acids, which act as emulsify- ing agents. Pancreatic lipase is secreted into the small intestine and requires a further pancreatic protein, colipase, for activity. It is specific for the primary ester links—ie, positions 1 and 3 in triacylglycerols—resulting in 2-monoacylglycerols and free fatty acids as the major end products of luminal triacyl- glycerol digestion. Inhibitors of pancreatic lipase are used to inhibit triacylglycerol hydrolysis in the treatment of severe obesity. Pancreatic esterase in the intestinal lumen hydrolyzes monoacylglycerols, but they are poor substrates, and only ∼25% of ingested triacylglycerol is completely hydrolyzed to glycerol and fatty acids before absorption (Figure 43–2). Bile salts, formed in the liver and secreted in the bile, permit emulsification of the products of lipid digestion into micelles together with dietary phospholipids and cholesterol secreted in the bile (about 2 g/d) as well as dietary cholesterol (about 0.5 g/d). Micelles are less than 1 μm in diameter, and soluble, so they allow the products of digestion, including the fat-soluble vitamins, to be transported through the aqueous environ- ment of the intestinal lumen to come into close contact with the brush border of the mucosal cells, allowing uptake into the epithelium. The bile salts remain in the intestinal lumen, where most are absorbed from the ileum into the enterohepatic circulation (see Chapter 26). Within the intestinal epithelium, 1-monoacyglycerols are hydrolyzed to fatty acids and glycerol and 2-monoacylglycer- ols are reacylated to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway. Glycerol released in the intestinal lumen is absorbed into the hepatic portal vein; glycerol released within the epi- thelium is reutilized for triacylglycerol synthesis via the nor- mal phosphatidic acid pathway (see Chapter 24). Long-chain fatty acids are esterified to yield to triacylglycerol in the mucosal cells and together with the other products of lipid digestion, secreted as chylomicrons into the lymphatics, entering the bloodstream via the thoracic duct (see Chapter 25). Short- and medium-chain fatty acids are mainly absorbed into the hepatic portal vein as free fatty acids. Cholesterol is absorbed dissolved in lipid micelles and is mainly esterified in the intestinal mucosa before being incorpo- rated into chylomicrons. Plant sterols and stanols (in which the B ring is saturated) compete with cholesterol for esterification, but are poor substrates, so that there is an increased amount of unesterified cholesterol in the mucosal cells. Unesterified cholesterol and other sterols are actively transported out of the mucosal cells into the intestinal lumen. This means that plant sterols and stanols effectively inhibit the absorption of not only dietary cholesterol, but also the larger amount that is secreted in the bile, so lowering the whole body cholesterol content, and hence the plasma cholesterol concentration. DIGESTION & ABSORPTION OF PROTEINS Native proteins are resistant to digestion because few peptide bonds are accessible to the proteolytic enzymes without prior denaturation of dietary proteins (by heat in cooking and by the action of gastric acid). Several Groups of Enzymes Catalyze the Digestion of proteins There are two main classes of proteolytic digestive enzymes (proteases), with different specificities for the amino acids forming the peptide bond to be hydrolyzed. Endopeptidases hydrolyze peptide bonds between specific amino acids throughout the molecule. They are the first enzymes to act, yielding a larger number of smaller fragments. Pepsin in the gastric juice catalyzes hydrolysis of peptide bonds adjacent to amino acids with bulky side-chains (aromatic and branched- chain amino acids and methionine). Trypsin, chymotrypsin, and elastase are secreted into the small intestine by the pancreas. Trypsin catalyzes hydrolysis of lysine and arginine esters, chy- motrypsin esters of aromatic amino acids, and elastase esters of small neutral aliphatic amino acids. Exopeptidases catalyze the hydrolysis of peptide bonds, one at a time, from the ends of peptides. Carboxypeptidases, secreted in the pancreatic juice, release amino acids from the free carboxyl terminal; aminopeptidases, secreted by the intestinal mucosal cells, release amino acids from the amino terminal. Dipeptidases and tripeptidases in the brush border of intestinal mucosal cells catalyze the hydrolysis of di- and tripeptides, which are not substrates for amino- and carboxypeptidases. The proteases are secreted as inactive zymogens; the active site of the enzyme is masked by a small region of the peptide chain that is removed by hydrolysis of a specific peptide bond. Pepsinogen is activated to pepsin by gastric acid and by acti- vated pepsin. In the small intestine, trypsinogen, the precursor of trypsin, is activated by enteropeptidase, which is secreted by the duodenal epithelial cells; trypsin can then activate chymo- trypsinogen to chymotrypsin, proelastase to elastase, procar- boxypeptidase to carboxypeptidase, and proaminopeptidase to aminopeptidase. Free Amino Acids & Small peptides Are Absorbed by Different Mechanisms The end product of the action of endopeptidases and exopep- tidases is a mixture of free amino acids, di- and tripeptides, and oligopeptides, all of which are absorbed. Free amino acids are absorbed across the intestinal mucosa by sodium-dependent active transport. There are several different amino acid trans- porters, with specificity for the nature of the amino acid side- chain (large or small, neutral, acidic, or basic). The various amino acids carried by any one transporter compete with each other for absorption and tissue uptake. Dipeptides and tripeptides enter the brush border of the intestinal mucosal Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library