915 Asthma | CHAPTER 79 age ≥12 years old with an eosinophilic phenotype and is administered SC every 2 weeks. Unlike mepolizumab, reslizumab, and benralizumab, FeNO levels >25 ppb in addition to blood eosinophil levels ≥150 cells/µL (0.15 × 109/L) is predictive of a response in reducing the asthma exacerbation rate by ∼50%. Magnesium Sulfate • Magnesium sulfate is a moderately potent bronchodilator, producing relaxation of smooth muscle by blocking calcium ion influx into smooth muscles; it may also have anti-inflammatory effects. • For patients with severe asthma exacerbations, a single 2 g IV infusion may reduce hospital admissions in adults who have an FEV1 <25%–30% predicted upon arrival in the emergency department, children and adults who have persistent hypoxemia after standard treatment, and children whose FEV1 remains <60% predicted after 1 hour of standard treatment. Adverse effects include hypotension, facial flushing, sweating, depressed deep tendon reflexes, hypothermia, and CNS and respiratory depression. Methylxanthines • Methylxanthines are rarely used today because of the high risk of severe life-threaten- ing toxicity, numerous drug interactions, and decreased efficacy compared with ICS, LABAs, and biologics. Theophylline is a moderately potent bronchodilator with mild anti-inflammatory properties and is available for oral and IV administration. It is not recommended in the GINA guidelines for acute exacerbations or persistent asthma. Theophylline dosing requires monitoring of serum concentrations for both efficacy and toxicity, including seizures and death. In addition, theophylline is eliminated primarily by metabolism via the hepatic CYP P450 microsomal enzymes (primarily CYP1A2 and CYP3A4), and drug interactions affecting metabolism significantly affect blood concentrations. EVALUATION OF THERAPEUTIC OUTCOMES • Focus the initial encounters on the patient’s concerns, expectations, and goals of treatment. Basic education should include discussion of asthma as a chronic lung dis- ease, the types of medications, and how they are to be used. Teach inhaler technique, advise the patient about when to seek medical advice, and provide written action plans. Both peak flow-based and symptom-based self-monitoring can be effective, if taught and followed correctly. • At the first follow-up visit, reinforce the educational messages from the first visit and review of the patient’s current medications, adherence, and any difficulties related to therapy. • The two key components of effective asthma control are “symptom control” and “future risk of adverse outcomes.” Assess symptom control by frequency of daytime and nighttime asthma symptoms, reliever medication use, and activity limitations; poor symptom control is also an indicator of future risk for exacerbations. • Future risk of adverse outcomes includes assessment of risks for future exacerbations, fixed airflow limitation (and thus diminished response to therapy), and medication adverse effects. To assess the risk for future exacerbations, measure lung function before the start of treatment and then 2 months later when maximum response to controller medications is likely attained. • During ongoing care, measure spirometry yearly but reserve long-term PEF monitor- ing for patients with severe asthma. • Validated questionnaires can be administered regularly, such as the Asthma Control Test, Asthma Therapy Assessment Questionnaire, and Asthma Control Questionnaire. • Ask patients about exercise tolerance because perceived good exercise tolerance may be biased by a sedentary lifestyle adapted to the frequency of bothersome symptoms.