and 3-hydroxysulfolane. The metabolites are excreted primarily in the urine, and the terminal elimination half-life is 2.5 hours. Adverse effects include dose-limiting myelo- suppression; nausea and vomiting that occur commonly but are generally mild; and pulmonary symptoms including in- terstitial pulmonary fibrosis, which is referred to as “busul- fan lung,” occurs belatedly (1–10 years posttreatment) and although rare, it is severe. Other adverse effects include mucositis, skin rash, impotence, amenorrhea, infertility, he- patoxicity, insomnia, anxiety, and an increased risk of sec- ondary malignancies. At normal doses, the agent is well tolerated except for the myelosuppression that occurs. This has allowed for high-dose therapy with the agent when ac- companied by bone marrow transplant to counter the myelo- suppressive effects. CISPLATIN (CIS-DIAMINEDICHLOROPLATINUM, DDP, PLATINOL, PLATINOL-AQ) Cisplatin is available in 10- and 50-mg vials for IV adminis- tration in the treatment of a wide variety of cancers including non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, bladder cancer, ovarian cancer, testicular cancer, and cancers of the head and neck. A liposo- mal form is also available as well as an injectable collagen matrix gel containing cisplatin. Compared with other platins, cisplatin is the most reactive and therefore the most effective in platinating DNA. After IV administration, the agent is widely distributed, highly protein bound (90%), and concen- trates in the liver and kidney. After infusion, covalent attach- ment to plasma proteins occurs such that after 4 hours, 90% of drug is protein bound. The elimination of platinum from the blood is a slow process with a terminal elimination half- life of 5 to 10 days. Metabolism involves aquation, which oc- curs to a greater extent once distribution out of the plasma has occurred. Additional metabolites have been seen result- ing from reaction with glutathione and cysteine. The greater reactivity of cisplatin gives rise to significant toxicities compared with other platins. These include dose-limiting nephrotoxicity, which normally presents as elevated blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine. This effect is cumula- tive upon repeated dosing and may progress further to necro- sis, altered epithelial cells, cast formation, and thickening of the tubular basement membranes but is generally reversible upon discontinuation of drug treatment. Sodium thiosulfate may be given to reduce the nephrotoxicity. Neurotoxicity may also be dose limiting, normally presenting initially as numbness but may progress to seizure. Other adverse effects include myelosuppression, nausea, vomiting, alopecia, ototoxicity, ocular toxicity, azoospermia, impotence, myo- cardial infarction, thrombotic events, and inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone. CARBOPLATIN (CBDCA, PARAPLAT, PARAPLATIN) Carboplatin is available in 50-, 150-, and 450-mg vials for IV administration in the treatment of ovarian cancer, bladder cancer, germ cell tumors, head and neck cancers, small cell lung cancer, and NSCLC. Activation of the agent occurs by aquation in a manner similar to that seen for cisplatin. The presence of the chelating 1,1-cyclobutane-dicarboxylate slows this reaction 100-fold and reduces the toxicity of the agent. The sites of alkylation and mechanisms of resistance are like those seen for cisplatin, and the two agents show cross-resistance. The agent is widely distributed upon IV administration but, because of its greater stability, it binds slowly to plasma proteins, requiring 24 hours to reach 90% bound drug compared with 4 hours for cisplatin. The agent is eliminated in the urine with a terminal elimination half-life of 2 to 6 hours. Adverse effects include myelosuppression, which is dose limiting. Other adverse effects include renal toxicity, nausea, vomiting, and peripheral neuropathy, but these occur much less frequently than with cisplatin. OXALIPLATIN (DIAMINOCYCLOHEXANE PLATINUM, DACH-PLATINUM, ELOXATIN) Oxaliplatin is available in 50- and 100-mg vials for IV ad- ministration in the treatment of ovarian cancer, metastatic colorectal cancer, and early stage colon cancer in combina- tion with 5-fluorouracil/leucovorin. The activation of the agent occurs in low-chloride environments to give the aquated species, which subsequently reacts with DNA in a manner similar to cisplatin. The mechanisms of resistance are similar for the two agents; however, oxaliplatin is not recog- nized by MMR enzymes and does not show cross-resistance with cisplatin. The agent is widely distributed, highly protein bound (85%–88%), and irreversibly binds to erythrocytes. Numerous metabolites have been identified many of which are produced as a result of nonenzymatic processes and in- clude chloro-, dichloro-, monoaquo-, and diaquo-species. The parent and metabolites are eliminated primarily in the urine with a long terminal elimination half-life of 240 hours. Neurotoxicity is dose limiting and normally presents as pe- ripheral neuropathy, which may be exacerbated by exposure to low temperatures. The neurotoxicity is normally reversible in contrast to that seen with cisplatin, which may be irre- versible. Other adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, di- arrhea, myelosuppression, and hypersensitivity reactions. Ototoxicity and renal toxicity occur only rarely in contrast to cisplatin. CARMUSTINE (BIS-CHLOROETHYL-NITROSOUREA, BCNU, BECENUM, CARMUBRIS, BICNU, GLIADEL) Carmustine is available in a 100-mg vial for IV administra- tion in the treatment of several types of brain tumors, Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s disease, and multiple myeloma. The agent is also available as an implantable wafer containing 7.7 mg of drug for intracavity implantation in the treatment of glioblastoma multiforme. Cytotoxicity is associated with cross-linking of DNA and RNA and car- bamoylation of glutathione reductase. Cross-resistance is not seen with other alkylating agents. The agent is very lipid soluble and easily crosses the blood-brain barrier, achieving concentrations greater than 50% of those seen in plasma. Metabolism involves both the nonenzymatic formation of reactive intermediates that may react with glutathione and other thiol-containing proteins, as well as enzymatic reduc- tive denitrosation and dechlorination. The half-life of the agent in plasma is short (15–20 minutes) because of rapid decomposition. Myelosuppression is dose limiting and may present as thrombocytopenia, leucopenia, or more rarely as anemia. This is generally seen 24 to 48 days after treatment. Pulmonary toxicity occurs rarely at low doses but at high doses such as those seen during bone marrow transplant may present as dyspnea, cough, pulmonary infiltrates, and progress to respiratory failure. This may be seen years after the completion of therapy. Other toxicities include nausea, 370 Wilson and Gisvold’s Textbook of Organic Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry