ChApTER 44 Micronutrients: Vitamins & Minerals 555 which activates a glutamate residue in the protein substrate to a carbanion, which reacts nonenzymically with carbon dioxide to form γ-carboxyglutamate. Vitamin K epoxide is reduced to the quinone by a warfarin-sensitive reductase, and the quinone is reduced to the active hydroquinone by either the same warfarin-sensitive reductase or a warfarin-insensitive quinone reductase. In the presence of warfarin, vitamin K epoxide can- not be reduced, but accumulates and is excreted. If enough vitamin K (as the quinone) is provided in the diet, it can be reduced to the active hydroquinone by the warfarin-insensitive enzyme, and carboxylation can continue, with stoichiometric utilization of vitamin K and excretion of the epoxide. A high dose of vitamin K is the antidote to an overdose of warfarin. Prothrombin and several other proteins of the blood- clotting system (Factors VII, IX, and X, and proteins C and S, Chapter 52) each contain 4 to 6 γ-carboxyglutamate residues. γ-Carboxyglutamate chelates calcium ions, and so permits the binding of the blood-clotting proteins to membranes. In vitamin K deficiency, or in the presence of warfarin, an abnor- mal precursor of prothrombin (preprothrombin) containing little or no γ-carboxyglutamate, and incapable of chelating cal- cium, is released into the circulation. O2 Vitamin K hydroquinone Vitamin k quinone reductase Sulfhydryl Sulfhydryl Disulfide Disulfide NADP NADPH Quinone reductase Vitamin K epoxidase Vitamin K epoxide Glutamate carbanion CH3 R OH OH CH3 R Vitamin K quinone O O CH3 R O O O HN CH C CH2 CO2 O COO CH Glutamate residue HN CH C CH2 O COO CH2 Carboxyglutamate residue HN CH CH C CH2 O COO OOC + non- enzymic Vitamin K epoxide reductase FIGURE 44–8 The role of vitamin K in the synthesis of γ-carboxyglutamate. Vitamin K Is Also Important in Synthesis of Bone & Other Calcium-Binding proteins A number of other proteins undergo the same vitamin K -dependent carboxylation of glutamate to γ-carboxyglutamate, including osteocalcin and the matrix Gla protein in bone, neph- rocalcin in kidney and the product of the growth arrest specific gene Gas6, which is involved in both the regulation of differ- entiation and development in the nervous system, and control of apoptosis in other tissues. All of these γ-carboxyglutamate containing proteins bind calcium, which causes a conforma- tional change so that they interact with membrane phospholip- ids. The release into the circulation of osteocalcin provides an index of vitamin D status. WATER-SOLUBLE VITAMINS VITAMIN B1 (THIAMIN) HAS A KEY ROLE IN CARBOHYDRATE METABOLISM Thiamin has a central role in energy-yielding metabolism, and especially the metabolism of carbohydrates (Figure 44–9). Thiamin diphosphate is the coenzyme for three multien- zyme complexes that catalyze oxidative decarboxylation reac- tions: pyruvate dehydrogenase in carbohydrate metabolism (see Chapter 17); α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase in the citric acid cycle (Chapter 16); and the branched-chain keto-acid dehydrogenase involved in the metabolism of leucine, isoleu- cine, and valine (see Chapter 29). In each case, the thiamin diphosphate provides a reactive carbon on the thiazole moiety that forms a carbanion, which then adds to the carbonyl group, eg, pyruvate. The addition compound is then decar- boxylated, eliminating CO2. Thiamin diphosphate is also the coenzyme for transketolase, in the pentose phosphate pathway (see Chapter 20). Thiamin triphosphate has a role in nerve conduction; it phosphorylates, and so activates, a chloride channel in the nerve membrane. Thiamin Deficiency Affects the nervous System & the heart Thiamin deficiency can result in three distinct syndromes: a chronic peripheral neuritis, beriberi, which may or may not be associated with heart failure and edema; acute pernicious (fulminating) beriberi (shoshin beriberi), in which heart failure Thiamin Thiamin diphosphate Carbanion O O O CH2 CH2 O O P P O O CH2 H3C NH2 H3C N N N CH2 CH2OH H3C N S CH2 S FIGURE 44–9 Thiamin, thiamin diphosphate, and the carbanion form. Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library