PhyTochemisTRy 142 17 A combined support and stationary phase which can replace the above is furnished by cross-linked polymers of specified pore size. These are produced as beads from styrene-like compounds and are marketed under the trade name ‘Porapak’. Advantages of such columns are that they remove undesirable adsorption sites present in diatomite, bleeding of the column (gradual leakage of station- ary phase from the column) is reduced, and the rapid elution of water and other highly polar molecules is achieved with little or no tailing. The operating temperature of the column is critical. Mixtures of low-boiling-point substances can be fractionated at low temperatures; some ethers, for example, can be dealt with at room temperature. Other materials require much higher temperatures—volatile oils 150–300°C, steroids 250°C and pesticides 400°C. Modern instruments can be temperature-programmed so that the column temperature increases as chromatography proceeds. This has the advantage that good separa- tions of mixtures containing compounds with widely different proper- ties can be obtained in one operation and long waits for the emergence of the more strongly retained fractions, with correspondingly less resolution, are lessened. The mobile phase is a gas which is inert in so far as the other compo- nents of the chromatogram are concerned. The choice of gas is depen- dent on the detector system (see below), and gases commonly used are hydrogen, nitrogen, helium and argon. The flow rate of the gas is important; too high a flow rate will give incomplete separations and too slow a rate will give high retention times and diffuse peaks. Typical flow rates for short columns are 10–50 ml min−1. By means of a suitable injection device, the sample to be analysed is introduced on to the top of the column; 1.0–5.0 μl is a typical volume but with some detectors it can be considerably less. The measurement of such small volumes is difficult, especially if quantitative results are required, and often the sample is dissolved in a low-boiling-point sol- vent such as ether; the ether passes rapidly through the column and emerges with the gas front. The mixture to be analysed should volatil- ize immediately it comes into contact with the stationary phase. Some compounds, not themselves volatile, may be converted into volatile derivatives before chromatography. Thus, sugars, flavonoids includ- ing anthocyanins, morphine, codeine and the cardioactive glycosides and aglycones can be chromatographed as their trimethylsiloxy deriva- tives, which are formed as below: 2ROH + (CH3)3SiNHSi(CH3)3 → 2ROSi(CH3)3 + NH3 Non-volatile plant acids can first be converted to their methyl esters by treatment with diazomethane. Along with the analytical columns of the above type, larger prepara- tive columns can be used for the isolation of the separated components in quantities sufficiently large for subsequent examination. Sample sizes of 0.1–20 ml and column lengths of up to 60 m and internal diameters of 1–2 cm illustrate the dimensions involved. The detector system analyses the effluent gas from the column. It may be of the integral type, in which some property—for example, titration value—of the eluate is recorded or it may be of the differential type, in which some property of the effluent gas is compared with that of a reference gas, often the mobile phase. The latter type is the most commonly used and examples are the katharometer, gas density bal- ance, flame ionization, β-argon ray and electron-capture detectors. For details of these detectors the student is referred to one of the several standard books on gas chromatography. All these differential detectors give an electrical signal which is recorded graphically by a suitable recorder. Because not all detectors give the same relative response to given compounds under the same conditions, some columns are fitted with a double detector system. The volume of gas that emerges from the column before the arrival of the gas front into which the sample was introduced at the head of the column is termed the ‘hold-up’ volume and it is dependent on the capacity of the column. It is obtained by multiplying the time which the gas front takes to pass through the column by the flow rate; the arrival of the front is often indicated on the recorder by a negative peak caused by the small amount of air injected with the sample. The observed retention volume VR,obs. of a component is calculated from its retention time, and the VR,obs. less the ‘hold-up’ volume is the adjusted reten- tion volume (VR,ad.). By taking into account the pressure drop along the length of the column the net retention volume (VR,net) is obtained. This volume is characteristic for a given compound under the defined conditions of the amount of stationary phase and temperature. Of more universal value is the specific retention volume (VR,sp), which is the VR,net reduced to 0°C g−1 of stationary phase: VR,sp= VR, net × 273 weight of stationary phase on column × temperature (K) of column Reference compounds are used to aid the identification of compo- nents of a mixture. For quantitative work with differential detectors, the areas enclosed by the peaks are proportional to the quantities of compounds which they represent. To obtain the percentage composi- tion of components within a mixture, without the necessity of placing known amounts of sample on the column, internal standards can be used. These are pure substances, mixed in known proportion with a sample of material to be analysed, which give sharp peaks on the chro- matogram not overlapping those of the mixture. Before use, internal standards must be calibrated for detector response against individual components of the mixture. Sophisticated attachments are available for some equipment. It is thus possible to record the radioactivities and mass spectra of the separated components of a mixture as they emerge from the column. Such instru- ments have immense potential in biological research. Data storage and retrieval units are now available as standard accessories. Some pharmacognostical examples of the applications of gas chro- matography include the examination of many volatile oils (see, for example the BP assay of Clove Oil), camphor, plant acids, some alka- loids (opium, tobacco and Conium and tropane derivatives), the resins of the Convolvulaceae and of Cannabis, and steroidal compounds such as the sapogenins and cardioactive glycosides and aglycones. The BP test for foreign oils in fixed oils involves the gas-chromatographic sep- aration of the methyl esters of the fatty acids produced by hydrolysis of the sample. The detection and estimation of cocaine and its metabo- lites in the body is an important forensic application. The estimation of pesticide residues on crops is of utmost importance, and here the sensitivity of detector systems, such as the electron capture detector, has made possible the determination of the chlorinated pesticides down to the parts-per-billion range. capillary-column gas chromatography As the name implies, capillary bore columns are used rather than the standard columns described above. They afford marked improvements in resolving power and in speed of analysis. The internal diameters of the columns range from about 0.15 mm to about 0.53 mm and the columns can be 1 to 60 m in length. They were originally made of stainless steel and then glass, but fused-silica columns are now considered the obvious choice as they are strong, easy to use, highly inert and give excellent performance. They can be conveniently used in the coiled condition, held, for example, in a 150 mm diameter cage. Such columns hold the stationary phase in a number of ways.