146 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS Absorption Absorption of drugs after oral administration may occur at the various body sites between the mouth and rectum. In general, the higher up a drug is absorbed along the ali­ mentary tract, the more rapid will be its action, a desirable feature in most instances. Because of the differences in chemical and physical nature among drug substances, a given drug may be better absorbed from one site than from another in the alimentary tract. Sometimes the oral cavity is the absorption site. Physically, oral absorption of drugs is managed by allow­ ing the drug substance to dissolve within the oral cavity with little or no swallowing until the taste of the drug has dissipated. This process is accommodated by provid­ ing the drug as extremely soluble and rapidly dissolving uncoated tablets. Drugs capable of being absorbed in the mouth present themselves to the absorbing surface in a much more concentrated form than when swallowed, because drugs become progressively more diluted with gastrointestinal secretions and contents as they pass along the alimentary tract. The oral or sublingual (beneath the tongue) admin­ istration of drugs is regularly used for only a few drugs, with nitroglycerin and certain steroid sex hormones being the best examples. Nitroglycerin, a coronary vasodilator used in the prophylaxis and treatment of angina pectoris, is available in the form of tiny tablets that are allowed to dissolve under the tongue, producing therapeutic effects a few minutes after administration. The dose of nitroglyc­ erin is so small ( usually 400 mg) that if it were swallowed, the resulting dilute gastrointestinal concentration might not result in reliable and sufficient drug absorption. Even more important, however, is the fact that nitroglycerin is rapidly destroyed by the liver through the first-pass effect. Many sex hormones have been shown to be absorbed materially better from sublingual administration than when swallowed. Although the sublingual route is prob­ ably an effective absorption route for many other drugs, it has not been extensively used, primarily because other routes have proven satisfactory and more convenient for the patient. Retaining drug substances in the mouth is unattractive because of the bitter taste of most drugs. Drugs may be altered within the gastrointestinal tract to render them less available for absorption. This may result from the drug's interaction with or binding to some nor­ mal constituent of the gastrointestinal tract or a foodstuff or even another drug. For instance, the absorption of the tetracycline group of antibiotics is greatly interfered with by the simultaneous presence of calcium. Because of this, tetracycline drugs must not be taken with milk or other calcium-containing foods or drugs. Sometimes the pharmacist intends to prepare a for­ mulation that releases the drug slowly over an extended time. There are many methods by which slow release is accomplished, including the complexation of the drug with another material, the combination of which is only slowly released from the dosage form. An example of this is slow-release wax-matrix potassium chloride tablets. These are designed to release their contents gradually as they are shunted through the gastrointestinal tract. Because their contents are leached out gradually, there is little incidence of gastric irritation. The intermingling of food and drug generally results in delayed drug absorption. Because most drugs are absorbed more effectively from the intes­ tines than from the stomach, when rapid absorption is intended, it is generally desirable to have the drug pass from the stomach into the intestines as rapidly as possible. Therefore, gastric emptying time is an important factor in drug action dependent on intestinal absorption. Gastric emptying time may be increased by a number of factors, including the presence of fatty foods (more effect than pro­ teins, which in turn have more effect than carbohydrates) or lying on the back when bedridden (lying on the right side facilitates passage in many instances), or decreased, as by the presence of drugs ( e.g., morphine) that have a quieting effect on the movements of the gastrointestinal tract. If a drug is administered in the form of a solution, it may be expected to pass into the intestines more rapidly than drugs administered in solid form. As a rule, large volumes of water taken with medication facilitate gastric emptying and passage into the intestines. The pH of the gastrointestinal tract increases progres­ sively along its length from about pH 1 in the stomach to approximately pH 8 at the far end of the intestines. pH has a definite bearing on the degree of ionization of most drugs, and this in turn affects lipid solubility, membrane perme­ ability, and absorption. Because most drugs are absorbed by passive diffusion through the lipoid barrier, the lipid­ water partition coefficient and the pK. of the drugs are of prime importance to both the degree and the site of absorption within the gastrointestinal tract. As a general rule, weak acids are largely un-ionized in the stomach and are absorbed fairly well from this site, whereas weak bases are highly ionized in the stomach and are not significantly absorbed from the gastric surface. Alkalinization of the gastric environment by artificial means (simultaneous administration of alkaline or antacid drugs) would be expected to decrease the gastric absorption of weak acids and to increase that of weak bases. Strong acids and bases are generally poorly absorbed because of their high degree of ionization. The small intestine serves as the major absorption pathway for drugs because of its suitable pH and the great surface area available for drug absorption along its approx­ imately 20-foot length from the pylorus at the base of the stomach to the large intestine at the cecum. The pH of the lumen of the intestine is about 6.5 (Fig. 5.3), and both weakly acidic and weakly basic drugs are well absorbed from the intestinal surface, which behaves in the ioniza­ tion and distribution of drugs between it and the plasma on the other side of the membrane as though its pH were about 5.3.