ADRENERGIC NEURON­BLOCKING AGENTS These drugs lower blood pressure by preventing normal physiologic release of norepinephrine from postganglionic sympathetic neurons. They have significant toxicity and are now rarely used. Guanethidine Guanethidine is no longer available in the USA but may be used elsewhere. In high enough doses, guanethidine can produce profound sympathoplegia. Guanethidine can thus produce all of the toxicities expected from “pharmacologic sympathectomy,” including marked postural hypotension, diarrhea, and impaired ejaculation. Because of these adverse effects, guanethidine is now rarely used. Guanethidine is too polar to enter the central nervous system. As a result, this drug has none of the central effects seen with many of the other antihypertensive agents described in this chapter. Guanadrel is a guanethidine­like drug that is no longer used in the USA. Bethanidine and debrisoquin, antihypertensive agents not available for clinical use in the USA, are similar. A. Mechanism and Sites of Action Guanethidine inhibits the release of norepinephrine from sympathetic nerve endings (see Figure 6–4). This effect is probably responsible for most of the sympathoplegia that occurs in patients. Guanethidine is transported across the sympathetic nerve membrane by the same mechanism that transports norepinephrine itself (NET, uptake 1), and uptake is essential for the drug’s action. Once guanethidine has entered the nerve, it is concentrated in transmitter vesicles, where it replaces norepinephrine and causes a gradual depletion of norepinephrine stores in the nerve ending. B. Pharmacokinetics and Dosage Because of guanethidine’s long half­life (5 days), the onset of sympathoplegia is gradual (maximal effect in 1–2 weeks), and sympathoplegia persists for a comparable period after cessation of therapy. The dose should not ordinarily be increased at intervals shorter than 2 weeks. C. Toxicity Therapeutic use of guanethidine is often associated with symptomatic postural hypotension and hypotension following exercise, particularly when the drug is given in high doses. Guanethidine­induced sympathoplegia in men may be associated with delayed or retrograde ejaculation (into the bladder). Guanethidine commonly causes diarrhea, which results from increased gastrointestinal motility due to parasympathetic predominance in controlling the activity of intestinal smooth muscle. Interactions with other drugs may complicate guanethidine therapy. Reserpine Reserpine, an alkaloid extracted from the roots of an Indian plant, Rauwolfia serpentina, was one of the first effective drugs used on a large scale in the treatment of hypertension. Because of adverse effects, it was rarely used and is no longer available in the USA. A. Mechanism and Sites of Action Reserpine blocks the ability of aminergic transmitter vesicles to take up and store biogenic amines, probably by interfering with the vesicular membrane­associated transporter (VMAT, see Figure 6–4). This effect occurs throughout the body, resulting in depletion of norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin in both central and peripheral neurons. Chromaffin granules of the adrenal medulla are also depleted of catecholamines, although to a lesser extent than are the vesicles of neurons. Reserpine’s effects on adrenergic vesicles appear irreversible; trace amounts of the drug remain bound to vesicular membranes for many days. Depletion of peripheral amines probably accounts for much of the beneficial antihypertensive effect of reserpine, but a central component cannot be ruled out. Reserpine readily enters the brain, and depletion of cerebral amine stores causes sedation, mental depression, and parkinsonism symptoms.