ChApTER 44 Micronutrients: Vitamins & Minerals 561 Biotin Is a Coenzyme of Carboxylase Enzymes Biotin functions to transfer carbon dioxide in a small num- ber of reactions: acetyl-CoA carboxylase (see Figure 23–1), pyruvate carboxylase (Figure 19–1), propionyl-CoA carbox- ylase (see Figure 19–2), and methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase. A holocarboxylase synthetase catalyzes the transfer of biotin onto a lysine residue of the apo-enzyme to form the biocy- tin residue of the holoenzyme. The reactive intermediate is 1-N-carboxybiocytin, formed from bicarbonate in an ATP- dependent reaction. The carboxyl group is then transferred to the substrate for carboxylation. Biotin also has a role in regulation of the cell cycle, acting to biotinylate key nuclear proteins. AS PART OF CoA & ACP, PANTOTHENIC ACID ACTS AS A CARRIER OF ACYL GROUPS Pantothenic acid has a central role in acyl group metabolism when acting as the pantetheine functional moiety of coenzyme A or acyl carrier protein (ACP) (Figure 44–18). The pantethe- ine moiety is formed after combination of pantothenate with cysteine, which provides the—SH prosthetic group of CoA and ACP. CoA takes part in reactions of the citric acid cycle (see Chapter 16), fatty acid oxidation (see Chapter 22), acetylations, and cholesterol synthesis (Chapter 26). ACP participates in fatty acid synthesis (see Chapter 23). The vitamin is widely distrib- uted in all food-stuffs, and deficiency has not been unequivo- cally reported in humans except in specific depletion studies. ASCORBIC ACID IS A VITAMIN FOR ONLY SOME SPECIES Vitamin C (Figure 44–19) is a vitamin for human beings and other primates, the guinea pig, bats, passeriform birds, and HN NH COO OOC S CH C O NH O Biotin HN NH C S O Biotinyllysine (biocytin) O H N CH C O NH N NH C S O Carboxy-biocytin O H N FIGURE 44–17 Biotin, biocytin, and carboxy-biocytin. O OH N N H N N CH2 CH2 CH2 CH2 C NH NH CHOH CH3 H3C CH2 NH2 O O O CH2 SH O P O O O P O O O P O C O C CH2OH CH2 CH2 C NH OH CHOH CH3 H3C O C O C O Coenzyme A (CoASH) Pantothenic acid FIGURE 44–18 pantothenic acid and coenzyme A. Asterisk shows site of acylation by fatty acids. CH2 HO O O OH CH2OH Monodehydroascorbate (semidehydroascorbate) CH2 HO O O O O CH2OH Dehydroascorbate OH CH2 HO O O OH CH2OH Ascorbate .O FIGURE 44–19 Vitamin C. most fishes and invertebrates; other animals synthesize it as an intermediate in the uronic acid pathway of glucose metabolism (see Figure 20–4). In those species for which it is a vitamin, there is a block in the pathway as a result of the absence of gulonolactone oxidase. Both ascorbic acid and dehydroascorbic acid have vitamin activity. Vitamin C Is the Coenzyme for Two Groups of hydroxylases Ascorbic acid has specific roles in the copper-containing hydroxylases and the α-ketoglutarate-linked iron-containing hydroxylases. It also increases the activity of a number of other enzymes in vitro, although this is a nonspecific reduc- ing action. In addition, it has a number of nonenzymic effects as a result of its action as a reducing agent and oxygen radical quencher (see Chapter 45). Dopamine β-hydroxylase is a copper-containing enzyme involved in the synthesis of the catecholamines (norepineph- rine and epinephrine), from tyrosine in the adrenal medulla and central nervous system. During hydroxylation the Cu+ is oxidized to Cu2+; reduction back to Cu+ specifically requires ascorbate, which is oxidized to monodehydroascorbate. A number of peptide hormones have a carboxy terminal amide that is derived from a terminal glycine residue. This gly- cine is hydroxylated on the α-carbon by a copper-containing Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library