Carbohydrate metabolism 188 and conversion between the units is by the following equation: IFCC-HbA1c (mmol/mol) = [DCCT-HbA1c (%) – 2.15] ¥ 10.929. HbA1c tests are certiﬁ ed by the National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program (NGSP) to standardize them against the results of the 1993 Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) but now are expressed as IFCC (International Federation of Clinical Chemistry) units. Intervention trials for type 1 and type 2 diabetes have shown that trying to optimize glycaemic control, as judged by HbA1c, to about 7 per cent (or above 53 mmol/mol) reduces the risk of microvascular diabetic complications. Fructosamine The measurement of plasma fructosamine concentrations may be used to assess glucose control over a shorter time course than that of HbA1c (about 2–4 weeks), but the assay has methodological limitations. Fructosamine reflects glucose bound to plasma proteins, predominantly albumin, which has a plasma half-life of about 20 days but is problematic in patients with hypoalbuminaemia, for example due to severe proteinuria. This assay may sometimes be useful in pregnancy and also if haemoglobin variants, for example HbS or HbC, exist that may interfere with certain HbA1c assays. Blood ketones Monitoring of blood ketones may have a place in the home management of type 1 diabetes. A b-hydroxybutyrate below 0.60 mmol/L is normal, whereas values between 0.60 mmol/L and 1.0 mmol/L may necessitate more insulin, and concentrations greater than 1.0 mmol/L a warning to seek medical advice. Urinary albumin determination and diabetic nephropathy One of the earliest signs of diabetic renal dysfunction is the development of small amounts of albumin in the urine, called microalbuminuria. Untreated, this can progress to overt albuminuria or proteinuria (more than 300 mg/day), impaired renal function and finally end-stage renal failure. Microalbuminuria is deﬁ ned as a urinary albumin excretion of 30–300 mg/day or 20–200 µg/min. An albumin concentration less than 30 mg/day or less than 20 µg/min is deﬁ ned as normoalbuminuria. A random urine sample or timed overnight collection can be useful to assess urinary albumin excretion, although the standard test is the urinary albumin to creatinine ratio (ACR), which avoids a timed urine collection. This should normally be less than 2.5 g/mol in males and less than 3.5 g/mol in females. An abnormal result should be conﬁ rmed in two out of three urine samples in the absence of other causes of proteinuria (see Chapter 19). Apart from being predictive of diabetic renal complications, urinary albumin excretion is also associated with increased vascular permeability and enhanced risk of cardiovascular disease. Optimization of glycaemic control can slow the progression of microalbuminuria, as can treating hypertension. Some recommend a target blood pressure lower than 140/80 mmHg in type 2 diabetes, or 135/75 mmHg or lower if microalbuminuria is present. The blood pressure targets are usually more aggressive in type 1 diabetes, partly as the lifetime risk of overt nephropathy is greater. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor therapy, such as lisinopril in type 1 diabetic patients with microalbuminuria, can result in a decline in the albumin excretion rate; similar ﬁ ndings have been shown with enalapril in type 2 diabetes. This action of ACE inhibitors is only partially dependent on their blood pressure-lowering ability, and therefore they presumably also have other important renal protective actions. The angiotensin II receptor antagonists (ARAs), for example irbesartan and losartan, have also been shown to have renal protective actions. Acute metabolic complications of diabetes mellitus Patients with diabetes mellitus may develop various metabolic complications that require emergency treat- ment, including coma, and these include the following. Hypoglycaemia This is probably the most common cause of coma seen in diabetic patients. Hypoglycaemia is most commonly caused by accidental overadministration of insulin or sulphonylureas or meglitinides. Precipitating causes include too high a dose of insulin or hypoglycaemic drug; conversely, the patient may have missed a meal or taken excessive exercise after the usual dose of insulin or oral hypoglycaemic drugs. Hypoglycaemia is particularly dangerous, and some patients lack awareness of this; that is to say, they lose warning signs such as sweating, dizziness and headaches. Driving is a major hazard under such circumstances. Patients should monitor their own blood glucose closely, carry glucose preparations to abort severe hypoglycaemia and avoid high-risk activities during which hypoglycaemic attacks could be dangerous.