ChApTER 44 Micronutrients: Vitamins & Minerals 557 from NAD, act to increase intracellular calcium in response to neurotransmitters and hormones. pellagra Is Caused by Deficiency of Tryptophan & niacin Pellagra is characterized by a photosensitive dermatitis. As the condition progresses, there is dementia and possibly diarrhea. Untreated pellagra is fatal. Although the nutritional etiology of pellagra is well established, and either tryptophan or nia- cin prevents or cures the disease, additional factors, includ- ing deficiency of riboflavin or vitamin B6, both of which are required for synthesis of nicotinamide from tryptophan, may be important. In most outbreaks of pellagra, twice as many women as men are affected, probably the result of inhibition of tryptophan metabolism by estrogen metabolites. pellagra Can Occur as a Result of Disease Despite an Adequate Intake of Tryptophan & niacin A number of genetic diseases that result in defects of trypto- phan metabolism are associated with the development of pel- lagra, despite an apparently adequate intake of both tryptophan and niacin. Hartnup disease is a rare genetic condition in which there is a defect of the membrane transport mechanism for tryptophan, resulting in large losses as a result of intestinal malabsorption and failure of renal reabsorption. In carcinoid syndrome, there is metastasis of a primary liver tumor of enterochromaffin cells, which synthesize 5-hydroxytryptamine. Overproduction of 5-hydroxytryptamine may account for as much as 60% of the body’s tryptophan metabolism, causing pellagra because of the diversion away from NAD synthesis. niacin Is Toxic in Excess Nicotinic acid has been used to treat hyperlipidemia when of the order of 1-6 g/d are required, causing dilatation of blood vessels and flushing, along with skin irritation. Intakes of both nicotinic acid and nicotinamide in excess of 500 mg/d also cause liver damage. VITAMIN B6 IS IMPORTANT IN AMINO ACID & GLYCOGEN METABOLISM & IN STEROID HORMONE ACTION Six compounds have vitamin B6 activity (Figure 44–12): pyri- doxine, pyridoxal, pyridoxamine, and their 5′-phosphates. The active coenzyme is pyridoxal 5′-phosphate. Some 80% of Niacin (nicotinic acid and nicotinamide) See also Figure 7–2 COO N CONH2 N FIGURE 44–11 niacin (nicotinic acid and nicotinamide). the body’s total vitamin B6 is pyridoxal phosphate in muscle, mostly associated with glycogen phosphorylase. This is not available in deficiency, but is released in starvation, when glycogen reserves become depleted, and is then available, especially to liver and kidney, to meet increased requirement for gluconeogenesis from amino acids. Vitamin B6 has Several Roles in Metabolism Pyridoxal phosphate is a coenzyme for many enzymes involved in amino acid metabolism, especially transamination and decarboxylation. It is also the cofactor of glycogen phosphory- lase, where the phosphate group is catalytically important. In addition, B6 is important in steroid hormone action. Pyridoxal phosphate removes the hormone-receptor complex from DNA binding, terminating the action of the hormones. In vitamin B6 deficiency, there is increased sensitivity to the actions of low concentrations of estrogens, androgens, cortisol, and vitamin D. Vitamin B6 Deficiency Is Rare Although clinical deficiency disease is rare, there is evidence that a significant proportion of the population have marginal vitamin B6 status. Moderate deficiency results in abnormalities of tryptophan and methionine metabolism. Increased sensitiv- ity to steroid hormone action may be important in the devel- opment of hormone-dependent cancer of the breast, uterus, and prostate, and vitamin B6 status may affect the prognosis. Vitamin B6 Status Is Assessed by Assaying Erythrocyte Transaminases The most widely used method of assessing vitamin B6 status is by the activation of erythrocyte transaminases by pyridoxal phosphate added in vitro, expressed as the activation coefficient. Pyridoxine Pyridoxine phosphate O O O OH N POCH2 CH2OH CH3 HOCH2 OH N CH2OH CH3 Pyridoxal Pyridoxal phosphate O O O OH N POCH2 HC=O CH3 HOCH2 OH N HC=O CH3 Oxidase Oxidase Aminotransferases Pyridoxamine Pyridoxamine phosphate O O O OH N POCH2 CH2NH2 CH3 HOCH2 OH N CH2NH2 CH3 Kinase Phosphatase Kinase Phosphatase Kinase Phosphatase FIGURE 44–12 Interconversion of the vitamin B6 vitamers. Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library