CHApTEr 43 Nutrition, Digestion, & Absorption 543 only children and has been reported only in developing coun- tries. The distinguishing feature of kwashiorkor is that there is fluid retention, leading to edema, and fatty infiltration of the liver. Marasmus is a state of extreme emaciation; it is the outcome of prolonged negative energy balance. Not only have the body’s fat reserves been exhausted, but there is wastage of muscle as well, and as the condition progresses there is loss of protein from the heart, liver, and kidneys. The amino acids released by the catabolism of tissue proteins are used as a source of metabolic fuel and as substrates for gluconeogenesis to maintain a supply of glucose for the brain and red blood cells (see Chapter 20). As a result of the reduced synthesis of proteins, there is impaired immune response and more risk from infections. Impairment of cell proliferation in the intesti- nal mucosa occurs, resulting in reduction in the surface area of the intestinal mucosa, and reduction in the absorption of such nutrients as are available. patients With Advanced Cancer and AIDS Are Malnourished Patients with advanced cancer, HIV infection and AIDS, and a number of other chronic diseases are frequently undernour- ished, a condition called cachexia. Physically, they show all the signs of marasmus, but there is considerably more loss of body protein than that occurs in starvation. The secretion of cytokines in response to infection and cancer increases the catabolism of tissue protein by the ATP-dependent ubiquitin- proteasome pathway, so increasing energy expenditure. This differs from marasmus, in which protein synthesis is reduced, but catabolism in unaffected. Patients are hypermetabolic, ie, they have a considerably increased BMR. In addition to activa- tion of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway of protein catabo- lism, three other factors are involved. Many tumors metabolize glucose anaerobically to release lactate. This is then used for gluconeogenesis in the liver, which is energy consuming with a net cost of six ATP for each mol of glucose cycled (see Figure 19–4). There is increased stimulation of mitochondrial uncoupling proteins by cytokines leading to thermogenesis and increased oxidation of metabolic fuels. Futile cycling of lipids occurs because hormone sensitive lipase is activated by a proteoglycan secreted by tumors, resulting in liberation of fatty acids from adipose tissue and ATP-expensive reesterification to triacylglycerols in the liver, which are exported in VLDL. Kwashiorkor Affects Undernourished Children In addition to the wasting of muscle tissue, loss of intestinal mucosa and impaired immune responses seen in marasmus, children with kwashiorkor show a number of characteris- tic features. The defining feature is edema, associated with a decreased concentration of plasma proteins. In addition, there is enlargement of the liver as a result of accumulation of fat. It was formerly believed that the cause of kwashiorkor was a lack of protein, with a more or less adequate energy intake; however, analysis of the diets of affected children shows that this is not so. Protein deficiency leads to stunting of growth, and children with kwashiorkor are less stunted than those with marasmus. Furthermore, the edema begins to improve early in treatment, when the child is still receiv- ing a low protein diet. Very commonly, an infection precipitates kwashiorkor. Superimposed on general food deficiency, there is probably a deficiency of antioxidant nutrients such as zinc, copper, caro- tene, and vitamins C and E. The respiratory burst in response to infection leads to the production of oxygen and halogen free radicals as part of the cytotoxic action of stimulated mac- rophages. This added oxidant stress triggers the development of kwashiorkor. PROTEIN & AMINO ACID REQUIREMENTS protein requirements Can Be Determined by Measuring nitrogen Balance The state of protein nutrition can be determined by measuring the dietary intake and output of nitrogenous compounds from the body. Although nucleic acids also contain nitrogen, protein is the major dietary source of nitrogen and measurement of total nitrogen intake gives a good estimate of protein intake (mg N × 6.25 = mg protein, as N is 16% of most proteins). The output of N from the body is mainly in urea and smaller quantities of other compounds in urine, undigested protein in feces; signifi- cant amounts may also be lost in sweat and shed skin. The dif- ference between intake and output of nitrogenous compounds is known as nitrogen balance. Three states can be defined. In a healthy adult, nitrogen balance is in equilibrium, when intake equals output, and there is no change in the total body content of protein. In a growing child, a pregnant woman, or a person in recovery from protein loss, the excretion of nitrog- enous compounds is less than the dietary intake and there is net retention of nitrogen in the body as protein—positive nitrogen balance. In response to trauma or infection, or if the intake of protein is inadequate to meet requirements, there is net loss of protein nitrogen from the body—negative nitro- gen balance. Except when replacing protein losses, nitrogen equilibrium can be maintained at any level of protein intake above requirements. A high intake of protein does not lead to positive nitrogen balance; although it increases the rate of protein synthesis, it also increases the rate of protein catabo- lism, so that nitrogen equilibrium is maintained, albeit with a higher rate of protein turnover. Both protein synthesis and catabolism are ATP expensive, and this increased rate of pro- tein turnover explains the increased diet-induced thermogen- esis seen in people consuming a high protein diet. The continual catabolism of tissue proteins creates the requirement for dietary protein, even in an adult who is not growing; although some of the amino acids released can be re- utilized, much is used for gluconeogenesis in the fasting state. Nitrogen balance studies show that the average daily requirement Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library