ChApTER 44 Micronutrients: Vitamins & Minerals 563 ■ Vitamin B6 as pyridoxal phosphate is the coenzyme for several enzymes of amino acid metabolism, including the transaminases, and of glycogen phosphorylase. Biotin is the coenzyme for several carboxylase enzymes. ■ Vitamin B12 and folate provide one-carbon residues for DNA synthesis and other reactions; deficiency results in megaloblastic anemia. ■ Vitamin C is a water-soluble antioxidant that maintains vitamin E and many metal cofactors in the reduced state. ■ Inorganic mineral elements that have a function in the body must be provided in the diet. When intake is insufficient, deficiency may develop, and excessive intakes may be toxic. REFERENCES Bender DA: Nutritional Biochemistry of the Vitamins, 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press, 2003. Bender DA, Bender AE: Nutrition: A Reference Handbook. Oxford University Press, 1997. Department of Health: Dietary Reference Values for Food Energy and Nutrients for the United Kingdom. Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1991. FAO/WHO: Human Vitamin and Mineral Requirements: Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation: Bangkok, Thailand. Food and Nutrition Division of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, 2000. Geissler C, Powers HJ: Human Nutrition, 12th ed. Elsevier, 2010. Gibney MJ, Lanham-New S, Cassidy A, et al: Introduction to Human Nutrition, The Nutrition Society Textbook Series, 2nd ed. Wiley–Blackwell, 2009. Institute of Medicine: Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium, Phosphorus, Magnesium, Vitamin D and Fluoride. National Academy Press, 1997. Institute of Medicine: Dietary Reference Values for Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin and Choline. National Academy Press, 2000. Institute of Medicine: Dietary Reference Values for Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium and Carotenoids. National Academy Press, 2000. Institute of Medicine: Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium and Zinc. National Academy Press, 2001. Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition of the Food Standards Agency: Folate and Disease Prevention. The Stationery Office, 2006. Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library