glutathione. Increased levels of these proteins may occur as cancer cells become resistant to these alkylating agents. Ifosfamide contains similar functionality and also requires activation by CYP2B6 and CYP3A4/5 (Scheme 10.7). Although the agents are similar, there are differences in the metabolism and activity of the agents.12,13 Both are adminis- tered as racemic mixtures as a result of the presence of a chi- ral phosphorus atom. There appears to be little difference in the metabolic fate of the R- and S-isomers of cyclophos- phamide, but in the case of ifosfamide, the R-isomer is con- verted to the required 4-hydroxy-ifosfamide 2 to 3 times faster than the S-isomer.14 The S-isomer undergoes preferen- tial oxidation of the side chain to give N-dechloroethylation, which removes the ability of the agent to cross-link DNA and also produces the neurotoxic and urotoxic chloroacetalde- hyde. An additional difference between cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide is the larger alkylating species that ultimately results after metabolic activation of ifosfamide. This results in the reactive form of ifosfamide having a higher affinity for DNA than the analogous form of cyclophosphamide and dif- ferences in the interstrand and intrastrand links that ultimately result. The differential metabolism also results in increased formation of the urotoxic chloroacetaldehyde in the case of ifosfamide such that bladder toxicity that normally presents as hemorrhagic cystitis becomes dose limiting with this agent. THIOTEPA The early success of the nitrogen mustards led researchers to investigate other compounds that contained a preformed aziri- dine ring, and thiotepa resulted from this work. Thiotepa con- taining the thiophosphoramide functionality was found to be more stable than the oxa-analog (TEPA) but is metabolically converted to TEPA by desulfuration in vivo.15 Thiotepa incor- porates a less reactive aziridine ring compared with that formed in mechlorethamine. The adjacent thiophosphoryl is electron withdrawing and, therefore, reduces the reactivity of the aziridine ring system. Although thiotepa is less reactive than many other alkylating agents, it has been shown to form cross-links. This is believed to occur by sequential reactions of thiotepa itself with DNA (Scheme 10.8).16 Monoalkylation is also possible as a result of aziridine formation via hydrolysis of thiotepa. Thiotepa is also metabolized by oxidative desulfurization mediated by CYP2B1 and CYP2C11.17 The decreased stability of the resulting TEPA undergoes hydroly- sis to give aziridine, which may function to monoalkylate Chapter 10 Antineoplastic Agents 361 Figure 10.4 Structures of cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide. Scheme 10.5 Metabolic and chemical activation of cyclophosphamide.