PhyTochemisTRy 136 17 The phytochemical investigation of a plant may thus involve the following: authentication and extraction of the plant material; separa- tion and isolation of the constituents of interest; characterization of the isolated compounds; investigation of the biosynthetic pathways to particular compounds; and quantitative evaluations. Parallel to this may be the pharmacological assessment of the separated components, which may, in some investigations, precede the characterization. eXtraction of plant material All plant material used should be properly authenticated, as much time and money can be wasted on the examination of material of doubtful origin. The choice of extraction procedure depends on the nature of the plant material and the components to be isolated. Dried materials are usually powdered before extraction, whereas fresh plants (leaves, etc.) can be homogenized or macerated with a solvent such as alco- hol. The latter is also particularly useful for stabilizing fresh leaves by dropping them into the boiling solvent. Alcohol is a general solvent for many plant constituents (most fixed oils excepted) and as such may give problems in the subsequent elimination of pigments, resins, etc. Water- immiscible solvents are widely used—light petroleum (essential and fixed oils, steroids), ether and chloroform (alkaloids, quinones). The extraction of organic bases (e.g. alkaloids) usually necessitates basifica- tion of the plant material if a water-immiscible solvent is to be used; for aromatic acids and phenols acidification may be required. Extraction itself may be performed by repeated maceration with agitation, per- colation or by continuous extraction (e.g. in a Soxhlet extractor, Fig. 16.2). Special methods for volatile oils, such as the enfleurage process, are considered in Chapter 22. Ultrasound may enhance the extraction process for some plant materials and the BP uses this in the preparation of a 50% ethanolic solution of opium for the assay of alkaloids and in the assay procedure of Agnus Castus. Its use has been studied for the extraction of atropine from Hyoscyamus muticus using various solvent systems (A. Djilana and B. Legseir Fitoterapia, 2005, 76, 148). spouted bed extraction In certain instances, as in the production of annatto powder from the seeds of Bixa orellana, the physical removal of the pigment layer of the seed-coat can yield a less impaired product than that produced by solvent extraction. Such methods can involve the use of a ball mill or a spouted bed unit. A development of the latter, the conical spouted bed extractor, has been investigated for annatto production. Basically it consists of a cylinder tapered at both ends and containing the seeds at the lower end through which a jet of hot air is forced. Seeds and pigment-loaded fine particles are propelled into the space above from whence the seeds fall back to be recirculated and the annatto powder moves to a cyclone from which it is collected. For full details see M. L. Passos et al., Drying Technology, 1998, 16, 1855. supercritical fluid extraction The use of supercritical fluids for the extraction of a range of materials including plant products of medicinal, flavouring and cosmetic inter- est has, during the last decade, become of increasing economic and research interest. In 1822, Cagniard de la Tour reported that above a certain tempera- ture, and pressure, single substances do not condense or evaporate but exist as a fluid. Under these conditions the gas and liquid phases both possess the same density and no division exists between the two phases. This is the critical state. For water, the critical conditions for tempera- ture (tc) and pressure (pc) are 374°C and 220 atmospheres respectively and for carbon dioxide tc = 31°C and pc = 74 atm. In practice conditions somewhat above the critical temperature and pressure for a particular substance are usually used and these supercritical fluids exhibit prop- erties intermediate between those of the liquid and gaseous phases. In phytochemistry these properties can be exploited to maximize the extraction of plant constituents. For industrial purposes supercritical fluid carbon dioxide has an environmental advantage over many com- mon organic solvents and leaves no solvent residues in the product. It also allows a low temperature process and has proved of value for the extraction of labile expensive fragrances and medicinal phytochemi- cals. To render it more polar a small amount of modifier, e.g. metha- nol, may be added to the carbon dioxide. The high pressures, and for some substances the high temperatures, involved in supercritical fluid extraction are the principal disadvantages of the technique. Pioneer work on medicinal plants was carried out by Stahl and coworkers (Planta Med., 1980, 40, 12, and references cited therein). They studied the use of liquefied and supercritical carbon dioxide and liquefied nitrous oxide for the extraction of various plant constituents, including various types of alkaloids, the pyrethrins and the compo- nents of chamomile. With pyrethrum flower extract, the content of pyrethrins is substantially higher (up to 50%) than in commercially available petroleum ether extracts. By a two-step precipitation the active ingredients can be raised to up to 60% without decomposition of the thermolabile pyrethrins. Further examples involving the extraction of phytochemicals with supercritical carbon dioxide follow: 1. Acylphloroglucinols: Oxygenated hyperforin derivatives of Hypericum 2. Alkaloids: Decaffeination of green coffee (indus- trial application) Isolation of vindoline from Catha ran­ thus roseus 3. Diterpene: Extraction of taxol from Taxus brevi­ folia (extraction more selective than conventional ethanol extraction), also from T. cuspidata 4. Fixed oils: Extraction of oil from evening primrose (subtle shift in triglyceride composi- tion; oxidation of γ-linolenic acid dur- ing extraction reduced) 5. Pigments: Extraction of annatto seeds 6. Sapogenins: Smilax china (increased yield of diosgenin) 7. Sesquiterpene lactones: In conjunction with gas chromatography for the isolation of parthenolide from feverfew. Addition of methanol or methyl cyanide as CO2 modifiers gave higher yields but produced co-extractives The use of 10% methanol in CO2 for the extraction of trilactones from ginkgo could be of commercial significance 8. Volatile oils and resins: Hops (commercial application); frank- incense and myrrh (efficient extraction); juniper berries (significant difference in composition compared with dis- tilled oil, the latter being significantly more enriched with monoterpenoid hydrocarbons) Piper nigrum muntok (superior aroma of oil; yield 2.8 per cent volatile oil compared with 0.6 per cent by steam