554 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS FIGURE 20.3. Sample electrodes used in IP. The active electrode will generally receive up to 3 ml of a solution contain­ ing the drug to be delivered. the exact mechanism is not known, it may involve a dis­ ruption of the stratum corneum lipids, allowing the drug to pass through the skin. Originally, the drug-containing coupling agent was applied to the skin and immediately followed by the ultrasound unit. Today, the product is applied to the skin, and some time is allowed for the drug to begin absorption into the skin; then the ultrasound unit is applied. The ultrasound emitted from the unit is actually sound waves outside the normal human hearing range. As ultrasound waves, they can be reflected, refracted, and absorbed by the medium, just as regular sound waves can. Consequently, these are factors that must be considered as affecting phonophoresis efficiency. Three effects of ultrasound are cavitation, microstream­ ing, and heat generation. Cavitation is formation and col­ lapse of very small air bubbles in a liquid in contact with ultrasound waves. Microstreaming, closely associated with cavitation, results in efficient mixing by inducing eddies in small-volume elements of a liquid; this may enhance dis­ solution of suspended drug particles, resulting in a higher concentration of drug near the skin, for absorption. Heat results from the conversion of ultrasound energy to heat energy and can occur at the surface of the skin as well as in deeper layers of the skin. The vehicle containing the drug must be formulated to provide good conduction of the ultrasonic energy to the skin. The product must be smooth and not gritty, as it will be rubbed into the skin by the head of the transducer. The product should have relatively low viscosity for ease of application and ease of movement of the transducer head. Gels work very well as a medium. Emulsions have been used, but the oil-water interfaces in emulsions can disperse the ultrasonic waves, reducing the intensity of the energy reaching the skin. It may also cause some local heat. Air should not be incorporated into the product, as air bubbles may disperse the ultrasound waves, resulting in heat at the liquid-air interface. Hydrocortisone is the drug most often adminis­ tered, in concentrations ranging from 1 % to 10% in a phonophoresis gel. Tapes A tape is a dosage form suitable for delivering active phar­ maceutical ingredients to the skin. It consists of the drug( s) impregnated into a durable yet flexible woven fabric or extruded synthetic material that is coated with an adhe­ sive agent. The active drug is generally in the dry state. The adhesive layer is designed to hold the tape securely in place without the need for additional bandaging. Unlike transdermal patches, tapes are not designed to control the release rate of the drug. The drug content of tapes is expressed as the amount per surface area with respect to the tape surface exposed to the skin. The use of an occlu­ sive dressing with the tape enhances the rate and extent of delivery of the drug to deeper layers of the skin and may result in greater systemic absorption of the drug. Tapes should be stored in tight containers and pro­ tected from light and moisture. They should be labeled "For External Use Only:' To use, one cuts a patch slightly larger than the area that will be treated. The backing paper is removed from the adhesive side and the tape applied to the skin. To ensure optimal adhesion, the tape should not be applied to folds in the skin. To minimize systemic absorption and to ensure good adhesion, tapes should be applied to dry skin. I ORAL ADMINISTRATION Films A film is a thin, flexible sheet of material, usually com­ posed of a polymer material that is actually used in vari­ ous routes of administration for oral administration in a rapidly dissolving form. They are prepared by mixing the polymer with the drug, sweetener, and flavor and casting, forming, drying, and packaging. Mucoadhesive System The Striant mucoadhesive testosterone buccal system is designed to adhere to the gum or inner cheek to provide a controlled and sustained release of testosterone through the buccal mucosa (2). Using a Striant system twice daily, morning and evening, provides continuous systemic deliv­ ery of testosterone to the patient. Each Striant buccal sys­ tem contains 30 mg of testosterone, along with the inactive ingredients such as anhydrous lactose, Carbomer 934P, hypromellose, magnesium stearate, lactose monohydrate, polycarbophil, colloidal silicon dioxide, starch, and talc. When used as directed in hypogonadal males, the circulat­ ing testosterone levels should approximate the physiologic levels in healthy men at 300 to 1,050 ng/dL.