100 SECTION 2 | Cardiovascular Disorders • Stage B (pre-HF): Patients with no current or prior HF signs or symptoms but with structural heart disease, abnormal cardiac function, or increased natriuretic peptide levels. Treatment is targeted at minimizing additional injury and preventing or slow- ing the remodeling process. In addition to treatment measures outlined for stage A, patients an LVEF (<40%) should receive an ACE inhibitor (or ARB) and a β-blocker, especially if there is a history of MI. Consider an aldosterone antagonist post-MI if LVEF is <40% (0.4) and an SGLT2 inhibitor in patients with DM to prevent HF development. • Stage C (HF): Patients with structural heart disease and previous or current HF symptoms. Most patients with HFrEF in stage C should receive guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT) proven to reduce morbidity and mortality. Consider hydralazine–isosorbide dinitrate (ISDN), loop diuretics, digoxin, ivabradine, and vericiguat in select patients (Fig. 9-1). Loop diuretics, ISDN, digoxin, and ivabradine are also used in select patients. • Stage D (advanced HF): These patients have persistent HF symptoms despite maximally tolerated GDMT. In addition to standard treatments for Stages A to C, they should be considered for referral to HF management programs so specialized interventions, including mechanical circulatory support, continuous IV positive inotropic therapy, car- diac transplantation, or hospice care (when no additional treatments are appropriate). NONPHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY OF CHRONIC HEART FAILURE • Interventions include cardiac rehabilitation and restriction of fluid intake and dietary sodium intake (<2–3 g of sodium/day) with daily weight measurements. • In patients with hyponatremia (serum sodium <130 mEq/L [mmol/L]) or persistent volume retention despite high diuretic doses and sodium restriction, limit daily fluid intake to 2 L/day from all sources. • Revascularization or anti-ischemic therapy in patients with coronary disease may reduce HF symptoms. • Drugs that can aggravate HF should be discontinued if possible. PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY OF CHRONIC HEART FAILURE • In general, patients with stage C HFrEF should receive an ACE inhibitor, ARB, or ARNI along with an evidence-based β-blocker, plus an aldosterone antagonist in select patients (Fig. 9-1). Administer a diuretic if there is evidence of fluid reten- tion. A hydralazine–nitrate combination, ivabradine, or digoxin may be considered in select patients. Dosing recommendations for GDMT used to treat patients with HFrEF and HFpEF are provided in Table 9-1. Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors • ACE inhibitors decrease angiotensin II and aldosterone, attenuating many of their deleterious effects that drive HF initiation and progression. ACE inhibitors also inhibit the breakdown of bradykinin, which increases vasodilation and also leads to cough. ACE inhibitors improve symptoms, slow disease progression, and decrease mortality in patients with HFrEF. Prior guidelines recommended that all patients with HFrEF, regardless of whether or not symptoms are present, should receive an ACE inhibitor to reduce morbidity and mortality, unless there are contraindications. However, recent evidence suggests that sacubitril/valsartan is preferred over ACE inhibitors (or ARBs) for HFrEF unless other circumstances (eg, affordability) are present in individual patients. • Start therapy with low doses followed by gradual titration as tolerated to the target or maximally tolerated doses (Table 9-1). Dose titration is usually accomplished by doubling the dose every 2 weeks. Evaluate blood pressure (BP), renal function, and serum potassium at baseline and within 1–2 weeks after the start of therapy and after each dose increase. Although symptoms may improve within a few days of starting therapy, it may take weeks to months before the full benefits are apparent. Even if symptoms do not improve, continue long-term therapy to reduce mortality and hospitalizations.