nitrogen and carbamate oxygen attached directly to the ben- zene ring in the cholinesterase inhibitor neostigmine are re- stricted to the plane of the ring, and consequently, the spa- tial arrangement of at least these atoms is established. The relative positions of atoms attached directly to mul- tiple bonds are also fixed. For the double bond, cis- and trans-isomers result. For example, diethylstilbestrol exists in two fixed stereoisomeric forms: trans-diethylstilbestrol is estrogenic, whereas the cis-isomer is only 7% as active. In trans-diethylstilbestrol, resonance interactions and minimal steric interference tend to hold the two aromatic rings and connecting ethylene carbon atoms in the same plane. Geometric isomers, such as the cis- and the trans-isomers, hold structural features at different relative positions in space. These isomers also have significantly different physical and chemical properties. Therefore, their distributions in the bio- logical medium are different, as are their capabilities for inter- acting with a biological receptor in a structurally specific manner. The United States Pharmacopeia recognizes that there are drugs with vinyl groups whose commercial form contains both their E- and Z-isomers. Figure 2.13 provides four examples of these mixtures. More subtle differences exist for conformational iso- mers. Like geometric isomers, these exist as different arrangements in space for the atoms or groups in a single classic structure. Rotation about bonds allows interconver- sion of conformational isomers. However, an energy barrier between isomers is often high enough for their independent existence and reaction. Differences in reactivity of func- tional groups or interaction with biological receptors may be caused by differences in steric requirements of the re- ceptors. In certain semirigid ring systems, conformational isomers show significant differences in biological activi- ties. Methods for calculating these energy barriers are de- scribed next. Open chains of atoms, which form an important part of many drug molecules, are not equally free to assume all pos- sible conformations; some are sterically preferred. Energy barriers to free rotation of the chains are present because of interactions of nonbonded atoms. For example, the atoms tend to position themselves in space so that they occupy staggered positions, with no two atoms directly facing each other (eclipsed). Nonbonded interactions in polymethylene Chapter 2 Drug Design Strategies 27 Figure 2.13 Examples of E- and Z-isomers.