Hyperglycaemia and diabetes mellitus 193 Investigation of suspected diabetes mellitus In most cases a diagnosis can be established from either fasting or random blood glucose determinations. In equivocal cases an OGTT may be required. Initial investigations Blood for plasma glucose estimation should be taken if a patient presents with symptoms of diabetes mellitus or glycosuria or if it is desirable to exclude the diagnosis, for example because of a strong family history. Blood samples may be taken: ● at least 10 h after a fast, ● at random, ● as part of an oral glucose load test. Diabetes mellitus is conﬁ rmed if one of the following is present: ● a fasting venous plasma concentration of 7.0 mmol/L or more on two occasions or once with symptoms, ● a random venous plasma concentration of 11.1 mmol/L or more on two occasions or once with symptoms. Diabetes mellitus is unlikely if the fasting venous plasma glucose concentration is less than 5.5 mmol/L on two occasions. Samples taken at random times after meals are less reliable for excluding than for conﬁ rming the diagnosis. The indications for performing an OGTT to diagnose diabetes mellitus may include: ● fasting venous plasma glucose concentration between 5.5 mmol/L and less than 7.0 mmol/L – this is debatable as the WHO recommends an OGTT only if fasting plasma glucose is greater than 6.0 mmol/L, ● random venous plasma concentration between 7.0 mmol/L and less than 11.1 mmol/L, ● a high index of clinical suspicion of diabetes mellitus, such as a patient at high risk of gestational diabetes with equivocal blood glucose results. The OGTT is sometimes also useful in the diagnosis of acromegaly (see Chapter 7). It has been suggested that an HbA1c of greater than 6.5 per cent is diagnostic of diabetes mellitus, but this is not universally agreed as other factors such as haemoglobin variants and abnormal erythrocyte lifespan may affect HbA1c levels. Oral glucose tolerance test Before starting this test, contact your laboratory: local details may vary. Procedure The patient should be resting and should not smoke during the test. The patient fasts overnight (for at least 10 h but not more than 16 h). Water, but no other beverage, is allowed. A venous sample is withdrawn for plasma glucose estimation. If the glucose concentration is measured in whole blood, the results will be approximately 1.0 mmol/L lower. A solution containing 75 g of anhydrous glucose in 300 mL of water is hyperosmolar, and not only may cause nausea and occasionally vomiting and diarrhoea, but also, because of delayed absorption, may affect the results of the test. It is therefore more usual to give a solution of a mixture of glucose and its oligosaccharides, because fewer molecules per unit volume have less osmotic effect than the equivalent amount of monosaccharide; the oligosaccharides are all hydrolysed at the brush border, and the glucose immediately enters the cells. A solution that contains the equivalent of 75 g of anhydrous glucose is: 113 mL of Polycal made up to approximately 300 mL with water. This solution should be drunk slowly over a few minutes. Further blood is taken 2 h after the ingestion of glucose. Note that in the investigation of acromegaly, sampling is half-hourly over the 2-h period (see Chapter 7). Interpretation of the OGTT is shown in Table 12.6. There is controversy as to how best to interpret the OGTT in pregnancy because of the differences in maternal glucose metabolism, as stated earlier. The following factors may affect the result of the test: ● Previous diet No special restrictions are necessary if the patient has been on a normal diet for 3–4 days. However, if the test is performed after a period of carbohydrate restriction, for example as part of a weight-reducing diet, this may cause abnormal glucose tolerance, probably because metabolism is adjusted to the ‘fasted state’ and so favours gluconeogenesis. ● Time of day Most OGTTs are performed in the morning and the reference values quoted are for this time of day. There is evidence that tests performed in the afternoon yield higher plasma glucose concentrations and that the accepted ‘reference