Hyperglycaemia and diabetes mellitus 185 Genetic syndromes associated with diabetes ● Down’s syndrome. ● Turner’s syndrome. ● Klinefelter’s syndrome. ● Myotonic dystrophy. Gestational diabetes mellitus In the UK, about 4–5 per cent of pregnancies are complicated by gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). It is associated with increased fetal abnormalities, for example high birthweight, cardiac defects and polyhydramnios. In addition, birth complications, maternal hypertension and the need for caesarean section may occur. If maternal diet/lifestyle factors fail to restore glucose levels, insulin is usually required to try to reduce the risk of these complications. Women at high risk for GDM include those who have had GDM before, have previously given birth to a high-birthweight baby, are obese, have a family history of diabetes mellitus and/or are from high-risk ethnic groups, for example black or South Asian. These women should be screened at the earliest opportunity and, if normal, retested at about 24–28 weeks, as glucose tolerance progressively deteriorates throughout pregnancy. In some units 50 g oral glucose is used and the blood glucose is sampled at 1 h – plasma glucose of more than or equal to 7.8 mmol/L being diagnostic (O’Sullivan’s screening test for gestational diabetes). If fasting venous plasma glucose is 7.0 mmol/L or more and/or the random measurement gives a concentration of 11.1 mmol/L or more (some doctors prefer to use a lower cut-off of about 9.0 mmol/L in pregnancy), the woman has GDM. In equivocal cases, an OGTT is indicated. Six weeks post partum, the woman should be reclassiﬁ ed with a repeat OGTT. Impaired glucose tolerance The WHO definition of impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) is a fasting venous plasma glucose concentration of less than 7.0 mmol/L and a plasma glucose concentration between 7.8 mmol/L and 11.1 mmol/L 2 h after an OGTT. Some patients with IGT develop diabetes mellitus later and may require an annual OGTT to monitor for this. However, because of the increased risk of vascular complications, secondary causes of IGT should be sought, dietary advice given, if necessary, and the patient followed up. In pregnancy IGT is treated as GDM because of the risks to the fetus. Impaired fasting glucose Impaired fasting glucose (IFG), like IGT, refers to a metabolic stage intermediate between normal glucose homeostasis and diabetes mellitus. The definition is that the fasting venous plasma glucose is 6.1 mmol/L or more but less than 7.0 mmol/L, and less than 7.8 mmol/L 2 h after an OGTT. Subjects at risk of developing diabetes mellitus A strong family history of diabetes mellitus may suggest that an individual is at risk of developing diabetes mellitus (particularly type 2), as may a family history of GDM, IGT or IFG. Those with predisposing HLA types and autoimmune disease may be susceptible to developing type 1 diabetes. Type 2 diabetes is more common in certain racial groups, such as Afro- Caribbeans, South Asians and Pacific Islanders. One of the reasons why type 2 diabetes is on the increase is the increasing tendency to obesity and central adiposity in urbanized and more sedentary populations consuming high-calorie diets. The thrifty phenotype (Barker–Hales) hypothesis proposes that nutritional deﬁ ciency in fetal and early infancy associated with low birthweight increases the risk of developing type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance. Insulin resistance syndrome or metabolic syndrome It has been recognized that certain coronary heart disease risk factors occur together. There is an aggregation of lipid and non-lipid risk factors of metabolic origin. A particular cluster is known as the metabolic syndrome, syndrome X or Reaven’s syndrome and is closely linked to insulin resistance. One definition is the presence of three or more of the following features: ● Abdominal obesity (waist circumference): – male more than 102 cm (40 in), – female more than 88 cm (35 in). ● Fasting plasma triglycerides more than 1.7 mmol/L. ● Fasting plasma high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol: – male less than 1.0 mmol/L, – female less than 1.3 mmol/L, ● Blood pressure more than or equal to 130/85 mmHg. ● Fasting blood glucose more than 5.5 mmol/L. Plasma levels of insulin would be expected to be raised, that is, hyperinsulinaemia. Other associated features may include polycystic ovary syndrome, fatty liver, raised ﬁ brinogen and plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 concentrations, renal sodium retention, hyperuricaemia and dense low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles (see Chapter 13).