Glyburide, glipizide, gliclazide, and glimepiride are 100–200 times more potent than tolbutamide. They should be used with caution in patients with cardiovascular disease or in elderly patients, in whom hypoglycemia would be especially dangerous. Glyburide (also named glibenclamide outside the USA) is metabolized in the liver into products with low hypoglycemic activity. The usual starting dosage is 2.5 mg/d or less, and the average maintenance dosage is 5–10 mg/d given as a single morning dose; maintenance dosages higher than 20 mg/d are not recommended. A formulation of “micronized” glyburide (Glynase PresTab) is available in a variety of tablet sizes. However, there is some question as to its bioequivalence with non­micronized formulations, and the FDA recommends careful monitoring to re­titrate dosage when switching from standard glyburide doses or from other sulfonylurea drugs. Glyburide is metabolized in the liver and the metabolic products of glyburide have hypoglycemic activity. This explains why assays specific for the unmetabolized compound suggest a plasma half­life of only 1–2 hours, yet the biologic effects of glyburide are clearly persistent 24 hours after a single morning dose in patients with diabetes. Glyburide is unique among sulfonylureas in that it not only binds to the pancreatic B cell membrane sulfonylurea receptor but also becomes sequestered within the B cell. This may also contribute to its prolonged biologic effect despite its relatively short circulating half­life. Glyburide should not be used in patients with liver failure and chronic kidney disease because of an increased risk of hypoglycemia. Elderly patients are at particular risk for hypoglycemia. Glipizide has the shortest half­life (2–4 hours) of the more potent sulfonylureas. Food can delay the absorption of this drug and if possible, the patient should wait 30 minutes before eating. With chronic use, the clinical significance of this recommendation is less clear and the drug is effective even if it is taken immediately before the meal. The recommended starting dosage is 5 mg/d, with up to 15 mg/d given as a single dose. When higher daily dosages are required, they should be divided and given before meals. The maximum total daily dosage recommended by the manufacturer is 40 mg/d, although some studies indicate that the maximum therapeutic effect is achieved by 15–20 mg of the drug. An extended­release preparation (Glucotrol XL) provides 24­hour action after a once­daily morning dose (maximum of 20 mg/d). However, this formulation appears to have sacrificed its lower propensity for severe hypoglycemia compared with longer­acting glyburide without showing any demonstrable therapeutic advantages over the latter (which can be obtained as a generic drug). At least 90% of glipizide is metabolized in the liver to inactive products, and the remainder is excreted unchanged in the urine. Glipizide therapy is therefore contraindicated in patients with significant hepatic impairment. Because of its shorter duration of action and completely inactive metabolites, it is preferable to glyburide in the elderly and for those patients with renal impairment. Glimepiride is use as monotherapy or as combination therapy and taken once daily. Glimepiride achieves blood glucose lowering with the lowest dosage of any sulfonylurea compound. A single daily dose of 1 mg has been shown to be effective, and the recommended maximal daily dosage is 8 mg. Glimepiride’s half­life under multidose conditions is 5–9 hours. It is completely metabolized by the liver to metabolites with weak or no activity. Gliclazide (not available in the United States) has a half­life of 10 hours. The recommended starting dosage is 40–80 mg daily with a maximum dosage of 320 mg daily. Higher dosages are usually divided and given twice a day. It is completely metabolized by the liver to inactive metabolites. Hypoglycemia and weight gain are the most common adverse effects of the sulfonylureas. Some sulfonamides (sulfisoxazole) and oral azole antifungal medications can inhibit metabolism of tolbutamide and result in prolonged hypoglycemia. Glyburide can occasionally cause flushing after ethanol ingestion, and this compound slightly enhances free water clearance. MEGLITINIDE ANALOGS Repaglinide is the first member of the meglitinide group of insulin secretagogues. These drugs modulate beta cell insulin release by regulating potassium efflux through the potassium channels previously discussed. There is overlap with the sulfonylureas in their molecular sites of action because the meglitinides have two binding sites in common with the sulfonylureas and one unique binding site. Repaglinide has a fast onset of action, with a peak concentration and peak effect within approximately 1 hour after ingestion, but the duration of action is 4–7 hours. It is cleared by hepatic CYP3A4 with a plasma half­life of 1 hour. Because of its rapid onset, repaglinide is indicated for use in controlling postprandial glucose excursions. The drug should be taken just before each meal in doses of 0.25–4 mg (maximum 16 mg/d); hypoglycemia is a risk if the meal is delayed or skipped or contains inadequate carbohydrate. It can be used in patients with renal impairment and in the elderly. Repaglinide is used as monotherapy or as combination therapy. There is no sulfur in its structure, so repaglinide may be used in patients with type 2 diabetes with a severe sulfur or sulfonylurea allergy.