PEG-Intron (peginterferon alfa-2b Powder for Injection) is a covalent conjugate of recombinant alfa interferon with PEG; approximate molecular weight of the PEG portion is 12 kDa, and the approximate molecular weight of the PEG-Intron molecule is 31 kDa. The product is a white to off-white lyophilized powder supplied in 2-mL vials for subcutaneous use. Each vial contains 74, 118.4, 177.6, or 222 mg of PEG-Intron and 1.11 mg dibasic sodium phos­ phate anhydrous, 1.11 mg monobasic sodium phosphate dihydrate, 59.2 mg sucrose, and 0.074 mg polysorbate 80. After reconstitution with 0.7 mL of the supplied diluent, which is sterile water for injection, each vial contains PEG­ Intron in strength of 100, 160, 240, or 300 mg/mL. Compared to interferon alfa-2b, PEG-Intron has one­ seventh the mean apparent clearance and a fivefold greater mean half-life, permitting a reduced dosing frequency. At effective therapeutic doses, PEG-Intron has approximately a 10-fold greater maximum concentration ( Cm.J and a 50-fold greater area under the curve than interferon alfa-2b (14). I FUSION PROTEIN: SPECIAL HANDLING Ontak Denileukin diftitox (Ontak) is included in this chapter because of its unusual nature and handling. Ontak is a fusion protein designed to direct the cytocidal action of diphtheria toxin to cells that express the interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor. Ontak is a recombinant DNA-derived cytotoxic protein composed of the amino acid sequences for diph­ theria toxin fragments A and B (Met1-Thr387)-His followed by the sequences for IL-2 (Ala1-Thr133); it is produced in an E. coli expression system. Ontak has a molecular weight of 58 kDa. The single-use vials (2 mL) contain 300 mg of recombinant denileukin diftitox in a sterile solution of 20 mM citric acid, 0.05 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), and less than 1 % polysorbate 20 in water for injec­ tion; the pH of the solution is between 6.9 and 7.2. The drug is indicated in the treatment of patients with persistent or recurrent cutaneous T-cell lymphoma whose malignant cells express the CD25 component of the IL-2 receptor. It should be used only by physicians experienced in the use of antineoplastic therapy and management of patients with cancer. Use of this drug should be in patients managed in a facility equipped and staffed for cardio­ pulmonary resuscitation and where the patients can be closely monitored for an appropriate period based on their health status. Ontak requires special handling as follows: (a) It must be brought to room temperature before preparing the dose. The vials may be thawed in the refrigerator for not more than 24 hours or at room temperature for 1 to 2 hours. (b) The solution in the vial may be mixed by gentle swirling: Do not vigorously shake Ontak solution. ( c) After thawing, a haze may be visible. This haze should clear when the solu­ tion is at room temperature. (d) Ontak solution must not C HAPTE R 20 Novel Dosage Forms and Drug Delivery Technologies 563 be used unless the solution is clear, colorless, and without visible particulate matter. ( e) Ontak must not be refrozen. The following are a few administration items of interest: (a) Diluted Ontak solution should be prepared and held in plastic syringes or soft plastic intravenous bags. Do not use a glass container because adsorption to glass may occur in a dilute state. (b) The concentration of Ontak must be at least 15 mg/mL in all steps in the preparation of the solu­ tion for intravenous infusion. This is best accomplished by withdrawing the calculated dose from the vial or vials and injecting it into an empty infusion bag. Then, for each 1 mL of Ontak, no more than 9 mL of sterile saline without preservative should be added to the intravenous bag. (c) Ontak solution should not be physically mixed with any other drugs. (d) Do not administer Ontak solution through an inline filter. ( e) Prepared solutions of Ontak should be administered within 6 hours, using a syringe pump or intravenous infusion bag. (fJ Unused portions of Ontak should be discarded immediately. Prior to handling this drug, pharmacists, nurses, and physicians should carefully read and understand all of the precautions explained in the package labeling (15). I IMPLANTS Implants are long-acting dosage forms that provide con­ tinuous release of the drug, often for periods of months to years. They are administered by the parenteral route; for systemic delivery, they may be placed subcutaneously, or for local delivery, they can be placed in a specific region in the body. They can be made by compression, melting, or sintering. They generally consist of the drug and rate­ controlling excipients. Several types are available includ­ ing pellets, resorbable microparticles, polymer implants, in situ-forming gel/solid implants, metal/plastic implants, and drug-eluting stents. Pellet implants are small, sterile, solid masses of the active drug with or without excipients and are usually administered using a suitable special injector (e.g., trocar) or by surgical incision. The size and rate of erosion will influence the release rate, which is generally first-order kinetics. Resorbable microparticles or microspheres gener­ ally range from 20 to 100 µm in diameter composed of the drug dispersed within a biocompatible, bioresorb­ able polymeric excipient (matrix). The microparticles are administered as an aqueous suspension subcutaneously or intramuscularly for systemic delivery, or they may be injected into a specific location in the body. Polymer implants can be formed as a single mass, such as a cylinder. The polymer matrix must be biocompatible and can be either biodegradable or nonbiodegradable. Shaped implants are administered by means of a suitable injector; release rates are not zero order but can approach zero-order kinetics. They are used to deliver potent small molecules, including steroids, and large molecules, includ­ ing peptides. An advantage to the biodegradable implants