g g Cases of euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis have been reported with off­label use of SGLT2 inhibitors in patients with type 1 diabetes. Patients with type 1 diabetes are taught to give less insulin if their glucose levels are not elevated. Because patients with type 1 taking an SGLT2 inhibitor may have normal glucose levels, they may either withhold or reduce their insulin doses to such a degree as to induce ketoacidosis. Therefore, SGLT2 inhibitors should not be used in patients with type 1 diabetes and in those patients labelled as having type 2 diabetes but who are very insulin deficient and prone to ketosis. OTHER GLUCOSE­LOWERING DRUGS Pramlintide is an islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP, amylin) analog. IAPP is a 37­amino­acid peptide present in insulin secretory granules and secreted with insulin. It has approximately 46% homology with the calcitonin gene­related peptide (CGRP; see Chapter 17) and physiologically acts as a negative feedback on insulin secretion. At pharmacologic doses, IAPP reduces glucagon secretion, slows gastric emptying by a vagally mediated mechanism, and centrally decreases appetite. Pramlintide is an IAPP analog with substitutions of proline at positions 25, 28, and 29. These modifications make pramlintide soluble, non­self­aggregating, and suitable for pharmacologic use. Pramlintide is approved for use in insulin­treated type 1 and type 2 patients. It is rapidly absorbed after subcutaneous administration; levels peak within 20 minutes, and the duration of action is not more than 150 minutes. It is metabolized and excreted by the kidney, but even at low creatinine clearance there is no significant change in bioavailability. It has not been evaluated in dialysis patients. Pramlintide is injected immediately before eating; doses range from 15 to 60 mcg subcutaneously for type 1 patients and from 60 to 120 mcg for type 2 patients. Therapy with this agent should be initiated at the lowest dosage and titrated upward. Because of the risk of hypoglycemia, concurrent rapid­ or short­acting mealtime insulin dosages should be decreased by 50% or more at initiation. Pramlintide should be injected using a separate syringe because it cannot be mixed with insulin. The major adverse effects of pramlintide are hypoglycemia and gastrointestinal symptoms, including nausea, vomiting, and anorexia. Since the drug slows gastric emptying, recovery from hypoglycemia can be problematic because of the delay in absorption of fast­acting carbohydrates. Selected patients with type 1 diabetes who have problems with postprandial hyperglycemia can use pramlintide effectively to control the glucose rise especially in the setting of a high­carbohydrate meal. The drug is not very useful in type 2 patients who can instead use the GLP­1 receptor agonists or SGLT2 inhibitors. Colesevelam hydrochloride, the bile acid sequestrant and cholesterol­lowering drug, is approved as an antihyperglycemic agent for patients with type 2 diabetes who are taking other glucose­lowering medications or have not achieved adequate control with diet and exercise. The mechanism of action is unknown but presumed to involve an interruption of the enterohepatic circulation and a decrease in farnesoid X receptor (FXR) activation. FXR is a nuclear receptor with multiple effects on cholesterol, glucose, and bile acid metabolism. Bile acids are natural ligands of the FXR. Additionally, the drug may impair glucose absorption. In clinical trials, it lowered the HbA1c concentration 0.3–0.5%. Adverse effects include gastrointestinal complaints (constipation, indigestion, flatulence). It can also exacerbate the hypertriglyceridemia that commonly occurs in patients with type 2 diabetes. Bromocriptine, a dopamine agonist, in randomized placebo­controlled studies lowered HbA1c by 0–0.2% compared with baseline and by 0.4–0.5% compared with placebo. The mechanism by which it lowers glucose levels is not known. The main adverse events are nausea, fatigue, dizziness, vomiting, and headache. Colesevelam and bromocriptine have very modest efficacy in lowering glucose levels, and their use in diabetes is questionable. MANAGEMENT OF THE PATIENT WITH DIABETES Diet A well­balanced, nutritious diet remains a fundamental element of therapy for diabetes. It is recommended that the macronutrient proportions (carbohydrate, protein, and fat) be individualized based on the patient’s eating patterns, preferences, and goals. Generally most patients with diabetes consume about 45% of their calories as carbohydrates, 25–35% fats, and 10–35% proteins. Limiting the carbohydrate intake and substituting some of the calories with monounsaturated fats, such as olive oil, rapeseed (canola) oil, or the oils in nuts and avocados, can lower triglycerides and increase HDL cholesterol A Mediterranean style eating pattern (a diet supplemented with walnuts almonds hazelnuts and olive oil) has been shown to