At lower doses used for treatment of mild hypertension, reserpine lowers blood pressure by a combination of decreased cardiac output and decreased peripheral vascular resistance. B. Pharmacokinetics and Dosage See Table 11–2. C. Toxicity At the low doses usually administered, reserpine produces little postural hypotension. Most of the unwanted effects of reserpine result from actions on the brain or gastrointestinal tract. High doses of reserpine characteristically produce sedation, lassitude, nightmares, and severe mental depression; occasionally, these occur even in patients receiving low doses (0.25 mg/d). Much less frequently, ordinary low doses of reserpine produce extrapyramidal effects resembling Parkinson disease, probably as a result of dopamine depletion in the corpus striatum. Patients with a history of mental depression should not receive reserpine, and the drug should be stopped if depression appears. Reserpine rather often produces mild diarrhea and gastrointestinal cramps and increases gastric acid secretion. The drug should not be given to patients with a history of peptic ulcer. ADRENOCEPTOR ANTAGONISTS The detailed pharmacology of α­ and β­adrenoceptor blockers is presented in Chapter 10. BETA­ADRENOCEPTOR–BLOCKING AGENTS Of the large number of β blockers tested, most have been shown to be effective in lowering blood pressure. The pharmacologic properties of several of these agents differ in ways that may confer therapeutic benefits in certain clinical situations. Propranolol Propranolol was the first β blocker shown to be effective in hypertension and ischemic heart disease. Propranolol has now been largely replaced by cardioselective β blockers such as metoprolol. All β­adrenoceptor–blocking agents are useful for lowering blood pressure in mild to moderate hypertension. In severe hypertension, β blockers are especially useful in preventing the reflex tachycardia that often results from treatment with direct vasodilators. Beta blockers have been shown to reduce mortality after a myocardial infarction and some also reduce mortality in patients with heart failure; they are particularly advantageous for treating hypertension in patients with these conditions (see Chapter 13). A. Mechanism and Sites of Action Propranolol’s efficacy in treating hypertension as well as most of its toxic effects result from nonselective β blockade. Propranolol decreases blood pressure primarily as a result of a decrease in cardiac output. Other β blockers may decrease cardiac output or decrease peripheral vascular resistance to various degrees, depending on cardioselectivity and partial agonist activities. Propranolol inhibits the stimulation of renin production by catecholamines (mediated by β1 receptors). It is likely that propranolol’s antihypertensive effect is due in part to depression of the renin­angiotensin­aldosterone system. Although most effective in patients with high plasma renin activity, propranolol also reduces blood pressure in hypertensive patients with normal or even low renin activity. Beta blockers might also act on peripheral presynaptic β adrenoceptors to reduce sympathetic vasoconstrictor nerve activity. In mild to moderate hypertension, propranolol produces a significant reduction in blood pressure without prominent postural hypotension. B. Pharmacokinetics and Dosage See Table 11–2. Resting bradycardia and a reduction in the heart rate during exercise are indicators of propranolol’s β­blocking effect, and changes in