140 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS and presumed completely absorbed, as in Figure 5.7, the AUC for each is essentially the same. Area Under the Serum Concentration-Time Curve The AUC of a concentration-time plot (Fig. 5.4) is considered representative of the total amount of drug absorbed into the circulation following the administration of a single dose of that drug. Equivalent doses of a drug, when fully absorbed, produce the same AUC. Thus, two curves dissimilar in terms of peak height and time of peak, like those in Figure 5. 7, may be similar in terms of AUC and thus in the amount of drug absorbed. As indicated in Figure 5.7, the AUC for formula­ tion A is 34.4 mg/mL x hours and for formulation B is 34.2 mg/mL x hours, essentially the same. If equivalent doses of drug in different formulations produce different AUC values, differences exist in the extent of absorption between the for­ mulations. Figure 5.9 depicts concentration-time curves for three different formulations of equal amounts of drug with greatly different AUC. In this example, formulation A deliv­ ers a much greater amount of drug to the circulatory system than do the other two formulations. In general, the smaller the AUC, the lesser drug absorbed. The fraction (F) (or bioavailability) of an orally admin­ istered drug may be calculated by comparison of the AUC after oral administration with that obtained after intrave­ nous administration: F = (AUC)0,./(AUC)intravenous In practice, it is rare for a drug to be completely absorbed into the circulation following oral administration. As noted earlier, many drugs undergo a first-pass effect resulting in some degree of metabolic degradation before entering the general circulation. In addition, factors of product for­ mulation, dissolution, chemical and physical interactions with the gastrointestinal contents, gastric emptying time, intestinal motility, and others limit the absorption of an ::J' 6.0 E C 0 E 4.0 CJ) u C 8 E cii 2.0 CJ) Cl 011 2 3 4 6 administered dose of a drug. The oral dosage strengths of many commercial products are based on considerations of the proportion of the dose administered that is expected to be absorbed and available to its site of action to produce the desired drug blood level and/ or therapeutic response. The absolute bioavailability following oral dosing is gen­ erally compared to intravenous dosing. As examples, the reported mean oral bioavailability of ciprofloxacin hydro­ chloride tablets (Cipro) is 70%, levothyroxine sodium tablets (Synthroid) is 40% to 80%, fentanyl buccal tablets (Fentora) is 65%, lisinopril tablets (Prinivil) is 25%, and alendronate sodium tablets (Fosamax) is 0.64%. However, for most drugs, there is large intersubject variability, and the absorbed doses may vary from patient to patient. I BIOEQUIVALENCE OF DRUG PRODUCTS A great deal of discussion and scientific investigation has been devoted recently to the problem of determining the equivalence between drug products of competing manufacturers. The rate and extent to which a drug in a dosage form becomes available for biologic absorption or use depend in great measure on the materials in the formulation and on the method of manufacture. Thus, the same drug when for­ mulated in different dosage forms may be found to possess different bioavailability characteristics and hence exhibit different clinical effectiveness. Furthermore, two seemingly identical or equivalent products of the same drug in the same dosage strength and in the same dosage form but differing in formulative materials or method of manufacture may vary widely in bioavailability and, thus, in clinical effectiveness. Dissolution requirements for capsules and tablets are included in the USP and are integral to bioavailability. Experience has shown that where bioinequivalence has 8 Area (0-16 hours) -■----■ A= 39.9 Mi x h o---<) B = 29.8 -#it x h 6:------6. C = 14.0 Mi x h 12 16 Time after drug administration (hours) FIGURE 5.9. Serum concentration-time curve showing peak height concentrations, peak height times, and areas under the curves for equal amounts of drugs from three different formulations following oral adminis­ tration. (Courtesy of D. I. Chodos and A. R. Disanto, Upjohn.)