ChApTER 44 Micronutrients: Vitamins & Minerals 559 Vitamin B12 Deficiency Causes pernicious Anemia Pernicious anemia arises when vitamin B12 deficiency impairs the metabolism of folic acid, leading to functional folate deficiency that disturbs erythropoiesis, causing immature precursors of erythrocytes to be released into the circula- tion (megaloblastic anemia). The most common cause of pernicious anemia is failure of the absorption of vitamin B12 rather than dietary deficiency. This can be the result of failure of intrinsic factor secretion caused by autoimmune disease affecting parietal cells or from production of anti-intrinsic factor antibodies. There is irreversible degeneration of the spinal cord in pernicious anemia, as a result of failure of methyla- tion of one arginine residue in myelin basic protein. This is the result of methionine deficiency in the central nervous system, rather than secondary folate deficiency. THERE ARE MULTIPLE FORMS OF FOLATE IN THE DIET The active form of folic acid (pteroyl glutamate) is tetrahy- drofolate (Figure 44–15). The folates in foods may have up to seven additional glutamate residues linked by γ-peptide bonds. In addition, all of the one-carbon substituted folates in Figure 44–15 may also be present in foods. The extent to which the different forms of folate can be absorbed varies, and folate intakes are calculated as dietary folate equivalents—the Tetrahydrofolate (THF) 5-Formyl THF 5-Formimino THF 5-Methyl THF OH H2N H N H N N N N H N H CH2 CH2 (Glu)n CH COO O C O HC CH2 10 OH H2N H N H N N N N H CH2 NH HC OH H2N H N H N N N N H CH2 CH3 OH H2N H N H N N N N H CH2 10-Formyl THF 5,10-Methylene THF 5,10-Methenyl THF O HC O C OH H2N H N N N N N H CH2 OH H2N N N N N N H CH2 CH2 OH H2N N N N N N H CH2 CH 5 + FIGURE 44–15 Tetrahydrofolic acid and the one-carbon substituted folates. sum of μg food folates + 1.7 × μg of folic acid (used in food enrichment). Tetrahydrofolate Is a Carrier of One-Carbon Units Tetrahydrofolate can carry one-carbon fragments attached to N-5 (formyl, formimino, or methyl groups), N-10 (for- myl) or bridging N-5–N-10 (methylene or methenyl groups). 5-Formyl-tetrahydrofolate is more stable than folate and is therefore used pharmaceutically (known as folinic acid), and the synthetic (racemic) compound (leucovorin). The major point of entry for one-carbon fragments into substi- tuted folates is methylene-tetrahydrofolate (Figure 44–16), which is formed by the reaction of glycine, serine, and cho- line with tetrahydrofolate. Serine is the most important source of substituted folates for biosynthetic reactions, and the activity of serine hydroxymethyltransferase is regu- lated by the state of folate substitution and the availabil- ity of folate. The reaction is reversible, and in liver it can form serine from glycine as a substrate for gluconeogenesis. Methylene-, methenyl-, and 10-formyl-tetrahydrofolates are interconvertible. When one-carbon folates are not required, the oxidation of formyl-tetrahydrofolate to yield carbon dioxide provides a means of maintaining a pool of free folate. Inhibitors of Folate Metabolism provide Cancer Chemotherapy, Antibacterial, & Antimalarial Drugs The methylation of deoxyuridine monophosphate (dUMP) to thymidine monophosphate (TMP), catalyzed by thymidylate synthase, is essential for the synthesis of DNA. The one-carbon fragment of methylene-tetrahydrofolate is reduced to a methyl group with release of dihydrofolate, which is then reduced back to tetrahydrofolate by dihydrofolate reductase. Thymidylate synthase and dihydrofolate reductase are especially active in tissues with a high rate of cell division. Methotrexate, an analog of 10-methyl-tetrahydrofolate, inhibits dihydrofolate reductase and has been exploited as an anticancer drug. The dihydrofolate reductases of some bacteria and parasites differ from the human enzyme; inhibitors of these enzymes can be used as antibacterial drugs (eg, trimethoprim) and antima- larial drugs (eg, pyrimethamine). Vitamin B12 Deficiency Causes Functional Folate Deficiency—the “Folate Trap” When acting as a methyl donor, S-adenosyl methionine forms homocysteine, which may be remethylated by methyl- tetrahydrofolate catalyzed by methionine synthase, a vitamin B12 –dependent enzyme (Figure 44–14). As the reduction of meth- ylene-tetrahydrofolate to methyl-tetrahydrofolate is irreversible and the major source of tetrahydrofolate for tissues is methyl- tetrahydrofolate, the role of methionine synthase is vital, and Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library