factors include lactic acidosis with metformin; fracture risk, heart failure, and possible bladder cancer with pioglitazone; GI side effects and pancreatitis with GLP­1 receptor agonists; nasopharyngitis, joint pains, and allergic reactions with DPP­4 inhibitors; genital infection, urinary tract infections, and ketoacidosis with SGLT2 inhibitors. All the agents are expensive except for metformin and sulfonylureas. In patients who experience hyperglycemia after a carbohydrate­rich meal, a short­acting secretagogue before that meal may suffice to control the glucose levels. Patients with severe insulin resistance may be candidates for pioglitazone. Patients who are very concerned about weight gain may benefit from a trial of a GLP­1, a GIP/GLP1 receptor agonist, or an SGLT2 inhibitor, which cause weight loss, or a DPP­4 inhibitor, which is weight neutral. Presence of cardiovascular disease should be considered; liraglutide, empagliflozin, and canagliflozin have been shown to have improved cardiovascular outcomes. The SGLT2 inhibitors should be considered as second choice in those patients with diabetic nephropathy or heart failure. If two agents are inadequate, a third agent is added, although data regarding efficacy of such combined therapy are limited. FIGURE 41–6 Suggested algorithm for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. The seven main classes of agents are metformin, sulfonylureas (includes nateglinide, repaglinide), pioglitazone, GLP­1 receptor agonists or dual GIP/GLP1 receptor agonist, DPP­4 inhibitors, SGLT2 inhibitors, insulins. Take into account efficacy, hypoglycemic risk, effect on weight, cardiovascular and renal benefits, major side effects, and cost. α­Glucosidase inhibitors, colesevelam, pramlintide, and bromocriptine not included because of limited efficacy and significant adverse reactions. (Data from Davies MJ, D’Alessio DA, Fradkin J, et al. Management of hyperglycaemia in type 2 diabetes, 2018. A consensus report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD), Diabetologia 2018 Dec;61(12):2461­2498.) When the combination of non­insulin agents (oral medications and injectable GLP­1 or GIP/GLP1 receptor agonists) fail to adequately control glucose levels, insulin therapy should be instituted. Various insulin regimens may be effective. Simply adding nighttime intermediate­ or long­acting insulin to the medication regimen may lead to improved fasting glucose levels and adequate control during the day. If daytime glucose levels are problematic, premixed insulins before breakfast and dinner may help. If such a regimen does not achieve adequate control or leads to unacceptable rates of hypoglycemia, a more intensive basal bolus insulin regimen (long­acting basal insulin) combined with rapid­acting analog before meals can be instituted. Metformin has been shown to be effective when combined with insulin therapy and should be continued. Pioglitazone can be used with