action of endogenously released GLP­1 and GIP. Three oral DPP­4 inhibitors, alogliptin, linagliptin, and sitagliptin are available in the United States. Saxagliptin was recently removed from the market. An additional inhibitor, vildagliptin, is available in Europe. Other DPP­4 inhibitors—gemigliptin, anagliptin, teneligliptin, trelagliptin, omarigliptin, evogliptin, and gosogliptin—have been approved outside the United States and European Union (Korea, India, Thailand, Japan, Russia, and several South American countries). GLUCAGON­LIKE PEPTIDE­1 (GLP­1) RECEPTOR AGONISTS Exenatide, a derivative of the exendin­4 peptide in Gila monster venom, has a 53% homology with native GLP­1 and a glycine substitution to reduce degradation by DPP­4. It is available in fixed­dose pens (5 mcg and 10 mcg). It is injected subcutaneously within 60 minutes before breakfast and dinner. It reaches a peak concentration in approximately 2 hours with a duration of action of up to 10 hours. Therapy is initiated at 5 mcg twice daily for the first month and if tolerated can be increased to 10 mcg twice daily. Exenatide extended­release is a once­weekly pen preparation that is dispensed as a powder (2 mg). It is suspended in the provided diluent just prior to injection. When exenatide is added to preexisting sulfonylurea therapy, the sulfonylurea dosage may need to be decreased to prevent hypoglycemia. Exenatide monotherapy and combination therapy results in HbA1c reductions of 0.2–1.2%. Weight loss in the range of 2–3 kg occurs and contributes to the improvement of glucose control. In comparative trials the extended­ release formulation lowers the HbA1c level a little more than the twice­daily preparation. Exenatide undergoes glomerular filtration, and the drug is not approved for use in patients with estimated GFR of less than 30 mL/min per 1.73 m2. High­titer antibodies against exenatide develop in about 6% of patients, and in half of these patients an attenuation of glycemic response has been seen. Liraglutide is a soluble fatty acid­acylated GLP­1 analog. Lysine is replaced with arginine at position 34 and a C16 acyl chain is attached to a lysine at position 26. The fatty­acyl GLP­1 retains affinity for GLP­1 receptors but the addition of the C16 acyl chain allows for noncovalent binding to albumin, both hindering DPP­4 access to the molecule and contributing to a prolonged half­life (approximately 12 hours) and duration of action. The half­life permits once­daily dosing. Treatment is initiated at 0.6 mg and increased after 1 week to 1.2 mg daily. If needed, the dosage can be increased to 1.8 mg daily. In clinical trials liraglutide results in a reduction of HbA1c of 0.8–1.5%; weight loss ranges from none to 3.2 kg. Liraglutide at a dose of 3 mg daily is approved for weight loss in patients without diabetes. In a postmarketing multinational study of 9340 patients with type 2 diabetes with known cardiovascular disease, the addition of liraglutide was associated with a lower primary composite outcome of death from cardiovascular causes, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke (hazard ratio 0.87, P = 0.01). Patients taking liraglutide had lower HbA1c levels, weight loss of more than 2 kg, lower systolic blood pressure, and fewer episodes of severe hypoglycemia. Dulaglutide consists of two GLP­1 analog molecules covalently linked to an Fc fragment of human IgG4. The GLP­1 moiety has amino acid substitutions that resist DPP­4 degradation. The half­life of dulaglutide is about 5 days. The usual dose is 0.75 mg weekly by subcutaneous injection. The maximum recommended dose is 4.5 mg weekly. Lixisenatide is a synthetic analog of exendin­4 (deletion of a proline and addition of 6 lysines to the C­terminal region) with a half­life of 3 hours. It is available in two fixed­dose pens (10 mcg and 20 mcg). The 10­mcg dose is injected once daily before breakfast for the first 2 weeks, and if tolerated, the dose is then increased to 20 mcg daily. Its clinical effect is about the same as exenatide with HbA1c lowering in the 0.4–0.6% range. Weight loss ranges from 1 to 3 kg. Antibodies to lixisenatide occur frequently (70%) and about 2.4% of patients with the highest antibody titers have attenuated glycemic response. Semaglutide is a synthetic analog of GLP­1 with a half­life of about 1 week. It has an alpha­aminoisobutyric acid substitution at position 8 that makes the molecule resistant to DPP­4 degradation and a C­18 fatty diacid chain attached to lysine at position 26 that binds to albumin, which accounts for the drug’s long half­life. The low dose pen delivers 0.25 mg or 0.5 mg and the higher dose pens delivers 1 and 2 mg. The recommendation is to start at 0.25 mg dose for the first 4 weeks and if tolerated increase the dose to 0.5 mg weekly; the dose can be further titrated to 2 mg dose after being on 1 mg dose for 4 weeks for additional glucose lowering. Semaglutide monotherapy and combination therapy lowers HbA1c from 1.5% to 1.8%. An increase in diabetic retinopathy was observed in the semaglutide treated group in one of the clinical trials. It is thought that this might have been secondary to the rapid glucose lowering with the drug. Semaglutide at a dose of 2.4 mg daily is approved for weight loss in patients without diabetes. Semaglutide coformulated with sodium N­[8(2­hydroxybenzoyl) amino] caprylate (SNAC) results in a complex that is lipophilic and resistant to proteolysis. It can therefore be given orally. The oral bioavailability is only 0.4% to 1%; thus oral semaglutide must be taken fasting with a glass of water