generally controlled with the administration of antiemetics and antidiarrheals. Mild myelosuppression is also seen with several of these agents. There has been concern about car- diotoxicity associated with protein kinase inhibitors be- cause of the fact that multiple kinases may be inhibited. This could potentially have several effects on signaling processes in cardiac tissue. For example if the Akt/PKB pathway was blocked, apoptosis may become activated and cardiac cells would die (Table 10.3). There has been some evidence for cardiotoxicity in this class and the agents have been ranked with imatinib, dasatinib, sorafenib, and suni- tinib having known or likely cardiotoxicity and gefitinib, erlotinib, and lapatinib having low cardiotoxicity. Concern of cardiotoxicity is also a result of the fact that other drugs such as the anthracyclines and several of the monoclonal antibodies directed against the EGF-R are known to have cardiotoxicity associated with their use.154 Therefore, pa- tients who have already been exposed to these agents may experience additional adverse effects to their cardiovascu- lar system if a protein kinase inhibitor were utilized and it also produced significant cardiotoxicity. Studies for the most part have not evaluated the cardiotoxicity of these agents and the given ranking is based on preliminary data, but there is concern about the cardiovascular effects of this class of agents. IMATINIB MESYLATE (STI-571, GLEEVEC) Imatinib is available in 100- and 400-mg capsules for oral administration and is indicated for the treatment of CML, gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) that express Kit and acute lymphoplastic leukemia that is positive for the Philadelphia chromosome. Bioavailability of the agent is nearly 100% by the oral route. The agent is highly protein bound and metabolized to the N-desmethyl derivative by CYP3A4-mediated removal of the piperazinyl methyl group. The resulting metabolite is similar to the parent in activity. Elimination occurs prima- rily in the feces, and the terminal half-life is 18 hours for the parent and 40 hours of the N-desmethyl metabolite. Resistant forms of the TK are known, which have altered amino acids that prevent binding. In addition, there may be increased levels of the kinase itself. The drug is also a sub- strate for Pgp and an additional efflux transporter known as breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP), both of which re- move the drug from the cell. These transporters are also in- hibited by the agent as well. Severe side effects include as- cites, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, skin rash, and pulmonary edema. Less serious side effects include nau- sea/vomiting, heartburn, and headache but overall, the agent is better tolerated than most other medications used in treat- ing the disease. DASATINIB (BMS-354825, SPRYCEL) Dasatinib is available in 20-, 50-, and 70-mg tablets for oral administration in the treatment of CML and ALL that are Ph1 positive. Although dasatinib is more potent than imatinib, bioavailability is much lower with values ranging between 14% to 34%. The agent is extensively metabo- lized with as many as 29 metabolites seen as result of oxi- dation by primarily CYP3A4 and phase II conjugation. The agent may act as an inhibitor of CYP3A4 and CYP2C8. Metabolism does give an active metabolite, but this accounts for only 5% of the total and is not believed to be important for the overall activity of the agent. Dasatinib is 95% protein bound with a terminal half-life of 3 to 5 hours. The majority of the drug and metabolites are elim- inated in the feces. The most common side effects are skin rash, nausea, diarrhea, and fatigue. Serious side effects in- clude myelosuppression appearing as neutropenia and thrombocytopenia, bleeding of the brain and GI tract, and fluid retention. GEFITINIB (ZD1839, IRESSA) Geftinib is available as 250-mg tablets for oral administration in the treatment of NSCLC for those patients who have failed to respond to platinum-based therapies and docetaxel and has also been used against squamous cell cancers of the head and neck. The agent is an inhibitor of the TK of EGF-R and pos- sibly other TKs as well. Gefitinib is both a substrate and in- hibitor of Pgp and BCRP. The agent is absorbed slowly after being administered orally with 60% bioavailability. Metabolism occurs in the liver and is mediated primarily by CYP3A4 to give eight identified metabolites resulting from defluorination of the phenyl ring, oxidative-O-demethylation, and multiple products arising as a result of oxidation of the morpholine ring. The O-demethylated product represents the predominate metabolite and is 14-fold less active compared with the parent. The parent and metabolites are eliminated in the feces with a terminal elimination half-life of 48 hours. The drug appears to be well tolerated with the most com- monly reported side effects being rash and diarrhea. It may also cause elevations in blood pressure especially in those pa- tients with preexisting hypertension, elevation of transami- nase levels, and mild nausea and mucositits. ERLOTINIB HYDROCHLORIDE (CP-358,774, TARCEVA) Erlotinib is available as 25-, 100-, and 150-mg tablets for oral administration and is used after failure of first-line therapy in metastatic NSCLC and as first-line therapy in combination with gemcitabine in the treatment of metasta- tic pancreatic cancer, and in treating malignant gliomas. The structural similarity to gefitnib imparts similar phar- macokinetic behavior with bioavailability of 60% and pro- tein binding of 93%. The agent is extensively metabolized primarily by CYP3A4. Three major metabolic pathways have been identified, involving oxidative-O-demethylation of the side chains followed by further oxidation to give the carboxlic acids, oxidation of the acetylene functionality to give a carboxylic acid, and aromatic hydroxylation of the phenyl ring para to the electron-donating nitrogen. The metabolites are primarily eliminated in the feces, and the terminal half-life is 36 hours.155 The major toxicities seen with the agent are dose-limiting skin rash and diarrhea. Other common adverse effects include shortness of breath, fatigue, and nausea. SORAFENIB TOSYLATE (BAY 43-9006, NEXAVAR) Sorafenib is available in 200-mg tablets for oral administra- tion and is used in the treatment of RCC and colon cancer. The agent is classified as a multikinase inhibitor because of its action on numerous kinase enzymes including the PDGF-R, VEGF-R, Kit, and Raf. Sorafenib is 39% to 48% Chapter 10 Antineoplastic Agents 405