Hyperglycaemia and diabetes mellitus 183 During gluconeogenesis, hydrogen ions are reused. Under aerobic conditions, the liver consumes much more lactate than it produces. The physiological accumulation of lactic acid during muscular contraction is a temporary phenomenon and rapidly disappears at rest, when slowing of glycolysis allows aerobic processes to ‘catch up’. Pathological lactic acidosis Lactic acid, produced by anaerobic glycolysis, may either be oxidized to CO2 and water in the TCA cycle or be reconverted to glucose by gluconeogenesis in the liver. Both the TCA cycle and gluconeogenesis need oxygen; anaerobic glycolysis is a non-oxygen-requiring pathway. Pathological accumulation of lactate may occur because: ● production is increased by an increased rate of anaerobic glycolysis, ● use is decreased by impairment of the TCA cycle or impairment of gluconeogenesis. Tissue hypoxia (Fig. 12.8) due to the poor tissue perfusion of the ‘shock’ syndrome is usually the most common cause of lactic acidosis. Hypoxia increases plasma lactate concentrations because: ● the TCA cycle cannot function anaerobically and oxidation of pyruvate and lactate to CO2 and water is impaired, ● hepatic and renal gluconeogenesis from lactate cannot occur anaerobically, ● anaerobic glycolysis is stimulated because the falling adenosine triphosphate (ATP) levels cannot be regenerated by the TCA cycle under anaerobic conditions. The combination of impaired gluconeogenesis and increased anaerobic glycolysis converts the liver from an organ that consumes lactate and H+ to one that generates large amounts of lactic acid. Severe hypoxia, for example following a cardiac arrest, causes marked lactic acidosis. If diabetic ketoacidosis is associated with signiﬁ cant volume depletion, this hypoxic syndrome may aggravate the acidosis. (See Chapter 4 for a further discussion of lactic acidosis.) The glycolytic pathway as well as the TCA cycle are summarized in Figures 12.1 and 12.2. HYPERGLYCAEMIA AND DIABETES MELLITUS Hyperglycaemia may be due to: ● intravenous infusion of glucose-containing fluids, ● severe stress (usually a transient effect) such as trauma, myocardial infarction or cerebrovascular accidents, ● diabetes mellitus or impaired glucose regulation. G6P Pyruvate LIVER LACTATE + H+ LACTATE + H+ MUSCLE LACTATE+ H+ GLYCOGEN G6P Pyruvate GLYCOGEN Figure 12.8 Metabolic pathways during tissue hypoxia. G6P, glucose-6-phosphate.