There are a wide variety of phosphodiesterases through- out the body. These enzymes hydrolyze the cyclic phosphate esters of adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). Although the substrates for this family of enzymes are cAMP and cGMP, there are differ- ences in the active sites. Figure 2.3 illustrates three drugs used to treat erectile dysfunction (sildenafil, tadalafil, and vardenafil). These three take advantage of the differences in active site structural requirements between phosphodi- esterase type 5 and the other phosphodiesterases. They have an important role in maintaining a desired lifestyle: treatment of erectile dysfunction caused by various medical conditions. The drugs approved for this indication were discovered by accident. The goal was to develop a newer treatment of angina. The approach was to develop phosphodiesterase in- hibitors that would prolong the activity of cGMP. The end result was drugs that were not effective inhibitors of the phosphodiesterase that would treat angina, but were effective inhibitors of the one found in the corpus cavernosum. The vasodilation in this organ results in penile erection. Summary One of the goals is to design drugs that will interact with re- ceptors at specific tissues. There are several ways to do this, including (a) altering the molecule, which, in turn, can change the biodistribution; (b) searching for structures that show in- creased specificity for the target receptor that will produce the desired pharmacological response while decreasing the affin- ity for undesired receptors that produce adverse responses; and (c) the still experimental approach of attaching the drug to a monoclonal antibody (see Chapter 5) that will bind to a specific tissue antigenic for the antibody. Biodistribution can be altered by changing the drug’s solubility, enhancing its ability to resist being metabolized (usually in the liver), alter- ing the formulation or physical characteristics of the drug, and changing the route of administration. If a drug molecule can be designed so that its binding to the desired receptor is en- hanced relative to the undesired receptor and biodistribution remains favorable, smaller doses of the drug can be adminis- tered. This, in turn, reduces the amount of drug available for binding to those receptors responsible for its adverse effects. The medicinal chemist is confronted with several chal- lenges in designing a bioactive molecule. A good fit to a specific receptor is desirable, but the drug would normally be expected to dissociate from the receptor eventually. The specificity for the receptor would minimize side effects. The drug would be expected to clear the body within a reason- able time. Its rate of metabolic degradation should allow reasonable dosing schedules and, ideally, oral administra- tion. Many times, the drug chosen for commercial sales has been selected from hundreds of compounds that have been screened. It usually is a compromise product that meets a medical need while demonstrating good patient acceptance. Chapter 2 Drug Design Strategies 11 Figure 2.3 Examples of phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors.