1Antianginal drug withdrawn from market. 2Channel types associated with sperm flagellar activity may be of the Catsper 1–4 variety. 3Synthetic snail peptide analgesic (see Chapter 31). 4Antiseizure agent (see Chapter 24). DHPs, dihydropyridines (eg, nifedipine); sFTX, synthetic funnel web spider toxin; ω­CTX, conotoxins extracted from several marine snails of the genus Conus; ω­aga­ IIIA and ω­aga­IVA, toxins of the funnel web spider, Agelenopsis aperta; SNX­482, a toxin of the African tarantula, Hysterocrates gigas. It has been known since the late 1800s that transmembrane calcium influx is necessary for the contraction of smooth and cardiac muscle. The discovery of a calcium channel in cardiac muscle was followed by the finding of several different types of calcium channels in different tissues (Table 12–4). The discovery of these channels made possible the measurement of the transmembrane calcium current, ICa, and subsequently, the development of clinically useful blocking drugs. Although the blockers currently available for clinical use in cardiovascular conditions are exclusively L­ type calcium channel blockers, selective blockers of other types of calcium channels are under investigation. Certain antiseizure drugs are thought to act, at least in part, through calcium channel (especially T­type) blockade in neurons (see Chapter 24). TABLE 12–4 Properties of several voltage­activated calcium channels. Type Channel Name Where Found Properties of the Calcium Current Blocked By L CaV1.1– CaV1.4 Cardiac, skeletal, smooth muscle, neurons (CaV1.4 is found in retina), endocrine cells, bone Long, large, high threshold Verapamil, DHPs, Cd2+, ω­aga­IIIA T CaV3.1– CaV3.3 Heart, neurons Short, small, low threshold sFTX, flunarizine, Ni2+ (CaV3.2 only), mibefradil1 N CaV2.2 Neurons, sperm2 Short, high threshold Ziconotide,3 gabapentin,4 ω­ CTXGVIA, ω­aga­IIIA, Cd2+ P/Q CaV2.1 Neurons Long, high threshold ω­CTX­MVIIC, ω­aga­IVA R CaV2.3 Neurons, sperm2 Pacemaking SNX­482, ω­aga­IIIA Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics Verapamil, the first clinically useful member of this group, was the result of attempts to synthesize more active analogs of papaverine, a vasodilator alkaloid found in the opium poppy. Since then, dozens of agents of varying structure have been found to have the same pharmacologic action (Table 12–5). Three chemically dissimilar calcium channel blockers are shown in Figure 12–4. Nifedipine is the prototype of the dihydropyridine family of calcium channel blockers; dozens of molecules in this family have been investigated, and several are currently approved in the USA for angina, hypertension, and other indications. TABLE 12–5 Clinical pharmacology of some calcium channel–blocking drugs.