Hyperglycaemia and diabetes mellitus 191 the very elderly, those with renal, liver or cardiac failure or those dehydrated or undergoing imaging tests with contrast media (see Chapter 4). Other causes of coma in patients with diabetes mellitus In addition to the comas described above, a patient with diabetes mellitus may present with other comas: ● Cerebrovascular accidents are relatively common in diabetic patients because of the increased incidence of vascular disease. ● Diabetic patients can, of course, have any other coma, for example drug overdose. ● Diabetic patients are also more at risk of diabetic nephropathy and renal failure and thus uraemic coma. The assessment of a diabetic patient presenting in coma or pre-coma is outlined in Table 12.5. Principles of treatment of diabetic coma Only the outline of treatment will be discussed. For details of management, the reader should consult a textbook of medical emergencies. Hypoglycaemia Hypoglycaemic coma needs prompt glucose replacement to avoid irreversible brain damage, for example 50 mL of 20 per cent glucose intravenously. If intravenous access is not an option, glucagon 1 mg can be given intramuscularly. Once the patient is awake, glucose- containing drinks can be given. Diabetic ketoacidosis Repletion of fluid and electrolytes should be vigorous. A 0.9 per cent normal saline solution should be administered, usually 1 L initially and then 1 L over the next hour and then 2 h and repeated at 4 h. Monitoring central venous pressure may be useful to assess fluid replacement. Dextrose–saline may be used when the plasma glucose concentration is less than 15 mmol/L. If the plasma glucose concentration is more than 20 mmol/L, 10 U soluble insulin should be given. A sliding insulin scale should be instigated. Insulin is given either by continuous intravenous infusion or by intermittent intramuscular injections, as soon as the plasma glucose and potassium concentrations are known. Once the patient is eating, subcutaneous insulin can be given instead. If the metabolic acidosis is very severe (pH less than 7.0), bicarbonate may be infused, but only until the blood pH rises to between about 7.15 and 7.20. It is unnecessary and often dangerous to correct the plasma bicarbonate concentration completely; it rapidly returns to normal following adequate ﬂ uid and insulin therapy. Remember that 8.4 per cent sodium bicarbonate is very hyperosmolar and may cause hypernatraemia and aggravate hyperosmolality. A rapid rise in the blood pH may aggravate the hypokalaemia associated with treatment. The plasma potassium concentration should be measured before insulin is given. It is almost always raised at presentation due to the metabolic acidosis and reduced glomerular ﬁ ltration rate, although total body potassium may be decreased. The plasma potassium concentration may fall rapidly once treatment is started, and therefore it should be monitored frequently and potassium given as soon as it starts to fall. Usually 20 mmol/L potassium is given to each litre bag apart from the ﬁ rst litre and provided there is no oliguria or hyperkalaemia. Diabetic ketoacidosis is severe if blood Table 12.5 Clinical and biochemical features of a diabetic patient presenting in coma Laboratory ﬁ ndings Plasma Urine Diagnosis Clinical features Glucose Bicarbonate Lactate Creatinine Ketones Hypoglycaemia Sweaty, drowsy Low N N N Neg Ketoacidosis Volume depletion High Low N N or up Pos Hyperventilating Hyperosmolar coma Volume depletion Very high N or slightly low N or up N or up Neg May be hyperventilating Lactic acidosis Hyperventilating Variable Low Up N Neg Uraemia Hyperventilating Variable Low N or up Up Neg Cerebrovascular accident Neurological May be raised May be low N N Neg N, normal; Neg, negative; Pos, positive.