Oral dosage for hypoglycemia is 3–8 mg/kg/d in three divided doses, with a maximum of 15 mg/kg/d. Diazoxide is similar chemically to the thiazide diuretics but has no diuretic activity. It is bound extensively to serum albumin and to vascular tissue. Diazoxide is partially metabolized; its metabolic pathways are not well characterized. The remainder is excreted unchanged. Its half­life is approximately 24 hours, but the relationship between blood concentration and hypotensive action is not well established. The blood pressure­lowering effect after a rapid injection is established within 5 minutes and lasts for 4–12 hours. When diazoxide was first marketed for use in hypertension, a dose of 300 mg by rapid injection was recommended. It appears, however, that excessive hypotension can be avoided by beginning with smaller doses (50–150 mg). If necessary, doses of 150 mg may be repeated every 5–15 minutes until blood pressure is lowered satisfactorily. Alternatively, diazoxide may be administered by intravenous infusion at rates of 15–30 mg/min. Because of reduced protein binding, smaller doses should be administered to persons with chronic renal failure. The hypotensive effects of diazoxide are also greater when patients are pretreated with β blockers to prevent the reflex tachycardia and associated increase in cardiac output. Toxicity The most significant toxicity from parenteral diazoxide has been excessive hypotension, resulting from the original recommendation to use a fixed dose of 300 mg in all patients. Such hypotension has resulted in stroke and myocardial infarction. The reflex sympathetic response can provoke angina, electrocardiographic evidence of ischemia, and cardiac failure in patients with ischemic heart disease, and diazoxide should be avoided in this situation. Occasionally, hyperglycemia complicates diazoxide use, particularly in persons with renal insufficiency. In contrast to the structurally related thiazide diuretics, diazoxide causes renal salt and water retention. However, because the drug is used for short periods only, this is rarely a problem. FENOLDOPAM Fenoldopam is a peripheral arteriolar dilator used for hypertensive emergencies and postoperative hypertension. It acts primarily as an agonist of dopamine D1 receptors, resulting in dilation of peripheral arteries and natriuresis. The commercial product is a racemic mixture with the (R)­isomer mediating the pharmacologic activity. Fenoldopam is rapidly metabolized, primarily by conjugation. Its half­life is 10 minutes. The drug is administered by continuous intravenous infusion. Fenoldopam is initiated at a low dosage (0.1 mcg/kg/min), and the dose is then titrated upward every 15 or 20 minutes to a maximum dose of 1.6 mcg/kg/min or until the desired blood pressure reduction is achieved. As with other direct vasodilators, the major toxicities are reflex tachycardia, headache, and flushing. Fenoldopam also increases intraocular pressure and should be avoided in patients with glaucoma. CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS In addition to their antianginal (see Chapter 12) and antiarrhythmic effects (see Chapter 14), calcium channel blockers also reduce peripheral resistance and blood pressure. The mechanism of action in hypertension (and, in part, in angina) is inhibition of calcium influx into arterial smooth muscle cells. Verapamil, diltiazem, and the dihydropyridine family (amlodipine, felodipine, isradipine, nicardipine, nifedipine, nisoldipine, nimodipine, and nitrendipine [the latter two not available in the USA]) are all equally effective in lowering blood pressure. Clevidipine is a newer member of this group that is formulated for intravenous use only. Hemodynamic differences among calcium channel blockers may influence the choice of a particular agent. Amlodipine and the other dihydropyridine agents are more selective as vasodilators and have less cardiac depressant effect than verapamil and diltiazem. Reflex sympathetic activation with slight tachycardia maintains or increases cardiac output in most patients given dihydropyridines. Verapamil has the greatest depressant effect on the heart and may decrease heart rate and cardiac output. Diltiazem has intermediate actions. The pharmacology and toxicity of these drugs are discussed in more detail in Chapter 12. Doses of calcium channel blockers used in treating hypertension are similar to those used in treating angina. Some epidemiologic studies reported an increased risk of myocardial infarction or mortality in patients receiving short­acting nifedipine for hypertension. It is therefore recommended that short­acting oral dihydropyridines not be used for hypertension. Sustained­release calcium blockers or calcium