907 Asthma | CHAPTER 79 • Step-down of therapy is warranted if symptoms have been well controlled and lung function has been stable for 3 months or longer. While engaging the patient in this effort, monitor symptoms and PEF and schedule follow-up. Stepping down ICS doses by 25%–50% at 3-month intervals is feasible and safe for most patients. • Personalized asthma management emphasizes three components: (1) ASSESS symp- tom control and risk factors, (2) ADJUST therapy and treat modifiable risk factors, and (3) REVIEW RESPONSE and optimize control about every 3 months. • The primary therapy of acute exacerbations includes inhaled SABAs and (depend- ing on severity) systemic corticosteroids, inhaled ipratropium, intravenous (IV) magnesium sulfate, and oxygen. Treatments are typically administered concurrently to facilitate rapid improvement. Measure initial response 1 hour after the first three inhaled bronchodilator treatments. • Figure 79-2 outlines strategies for self-management of worsening asthma in adoles- cents and adults with a written asthma action plan. • Figure 79-3 is an algorithm for management of acute asthma exacerbations in acute care facilities (eg, emergency departments). β2-Agonists • SABAs (eg, albuterol) are the most effective bronchodilators and the treatment of first choice for managing acute severe asthma. A SABA is also indicated for as-needed treatment of intermittent episodes of bronchospasm (eg, exercise-induced bron- chospasm). Aerosol administration enhances bronchoselectivity and provides more rapid response and greater protection against provocations (eg, exercise, allergen challenges) than systemic administration. In adults, administration as either con- tinuous nebulization or intermittent administration (every 20 minutes for 3 doses) administration over 1-hour results in equivalent improvement. There is no role for IV β2 agonists in severe asthma. TABLE 79-1 GINA Recommendations for Initial Controller Treatment in Adults and Adolescents Symptom Presentation Preferred Treatment (Evidence Level) Symptoms or need for SABA less than 2×/mo; no waking due to asthma in last month; and no risk factors for exacerbations, including in prior year No controller (D) Infrequent symptoms, but patient has one or more risk factors for exacerbation (eg, low lung function, use of OCS in prior year, intensive care treatment for asthma ever) Low-dose ICS (D) Symptoms or need for SABA between 2×/mo and 2×/week, or patient wakes due to asthma more than once/mo Low-dose ICS (D) Symptoms or need for SABA >2×/week Low-dose ICSa (A) Troublesome symptoms most days or waking ≥1 ×/week, esp. if any risk factors exist Medium/high-dose ICS or low-dose ICS/LABAb (A) Symptoms consistent with severely uncontrolled asthma, or with an acute exacerbation OCS short course AND start of high-dose ICS or moderate-dose ICS/LABAb (D) aLess effective options are LTRA or theophylline. bNot recommended for initial controller treatment in children ages 6–11 years. (A), (B), (C), (D) = grade of evidence with A as the highest grade and D as the lowest grade.