attacks with an efficacy similar to that of calcium channel blockers and β blockers. The lack of effect on gastrointestinal and bronchial smooth muscle is an advantage of ivabradine, and it is approved for use in angina and heart failure outside the USA. In the USA, it is approved for heart failure and is used off­label for angina in combination with β blockers. The Rho kinases (ROCK) comprise a family of enzymes that inhibit vascular relaxation and diverse functions of several other cell types. Excessive activity of these enzymes has been implicated in coronary spasm, pulmonary hypertension, apoptosis, and other conditions. Drugs targeting the enzyme have therefore been sought for possible clinical applications. Fasudil is an inhibitor of smooth muscle Rho kinase and reduces coronary vasospasm in experimental animals. In clinical trials in patients with CAD, it has improved performance in stress tests. It is investigational in angina in the USA and Europe. Allopurinol represents another type of metabolic modifier. Allopurinol inhibits xanthine oxidase (see Chapter 36), an enzyme that contributes to oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunction in addition to reducing uric acid synthesis, its mechanism of action in gout. Studies suggest that high­dose allopurinol (eg, 600 mg/d) prolongs exercise time in patients with atherosclerotic angina. The mechanism is uncertain, but the drug appears to improve endothelium­dependent vasodilation. Allopurinol is not currently approved for use in angina. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF DRUGS USED TO TREAT ANGINA Therapy of coronary artery disease (CAD) is important because angina and other manifestations of CAD severely impact quality of life and even life itself. Several grading systems have been devised to rate the severity of disease based on the limitation of the patient’s physical activity and to guide therapy (see Goldman reference). Treatment includes both medical and surgical methods. Refractory angina and acute coronary syndromes are best treated with physical revascularization, ie, percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), with insertion of stents, or coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). The standard of care for acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is urgent stenting. However, prevention of ACS and treatment of chronic angina can be accomplished in many patients with pharmacologic therapy. Because the most common cause of angina is atherosclerotic disease of the coronaries, therapy must address the underlying causes of CAD as well as the immediate symptoms of angina. In addition to reducing the need for antianginal therapy, such primary management has been shown to reduce major cardiac events such as myocardial infarction. First­line therapy of CAD depends on modification of risk factors such as hypertension (see Chapter 11), hyperlipidemia (see Chapter 35), obesity, smoking, and clinical depression. In addition, antiplatelet drugs (see Chapter 34) are very important. Specific pharmacologic therapy to prevent myocardial infarction and death consists of antiplatelet agents (aspirin, ADP receptor blockers, Chapter 34) and lipid­lowering agents, especially statins (Chapter 35). Aggressive therapy with statins has been shown to reduce the incidence and severity of ischemia in patients during exercise testing and the incidence of cardiac events (including infarction and death) in clinical trials. ACE inhibitors also reduce the risk of adverse cardiac events in patients at high risk for CAD. In patients with unstable angina and non­ST­segment elevation myocardial infarction, aggressive therapy consisting of coronary stenting, antilipid drugs, heparin, and antiplatelet agents is recommended. The treatment of established angina and other manifestations of myocardial ischemia includes the corrective measures just described as well as treatment to prevent or relieve symptoms. Treatment of symptoms is based on reduction of myocardial oxygen demand and increase of coronary blood flow to the potentially ischemic myocardium to restore the balance between myocardial oxygen supply and demand. Angina of Effort Many studies have demonstrated that β blockers, nitrates, and calcium channel blockers increase time to onset of angina and ST depression during treadmill tests in patients with angina of effort (Figure 12–5). Although exercise tolerance increases, there is usually no change in the angina threshold, ie, the heart rate times blood pressure product at which symptoms occur. FIGURE 12–5 Effects of diltiazem on the double product (heart rate × systolic blood pressure) in a group of 20 patients with angina of effort. In a double­blind study using a standard protocol, patients were tested on a treadmill during treatment with placebo and three doses of the drug. Heart rate (HR) and systolic blood pressure (BP) were recorded at 180 seconds of exercise (midpoints of lines) and at the time of onset of anginal symptoms (rightmost points). f (