GeNeRAL meThoDs AssociATeD WiTh The PhyTochemicAL iNVesTiGATioN oF heRBAL PRoDUcTs 147 17 are germinated under aseptic conditions, and the root is severed and transferred to a sterile nutrient solution. Under suitable conditions a rapid growth is obtained and subcultures may be produced as neces- sary. In this way strains of tomato roots have been maintained for many years. For biogenetic and growth studies, selected compounds can be added to the culture as necessary. It has been demonstrated by this method that tropane alkaloids are formed in the roots of a number of Solanaceae. Also, the incorporation of a number of precursors into the alkaloids has been followed. The technique can be extended to the cultivation of isolated tissues and cells (see Chapter 13), the use of which affords considerable potential in the investigation of biogenetic pathways. They offer the prospect of absolutely uniform plant material, obtainable at all times and manageable under regulated and reproducible conditions— factors rarely possible in work with entire living plants. Furthermore, potential precursors of the metabolite under investigation can eas- ily be added to the system and samples can be taken repeatedly for analysis. The aseptic nature of the culture means that bacterial and fungal modifications of the precursor are eliminated. The method has recently been used to study the bifurcation of the taxoid biosynthetic pathway in Taxus caspidata by the administration of early precursors to the cell culture (R. E. B. Ketchum et al., Phytochemistry, 2007, 68, 335). Grafts Grafting techniques have considerable use in biosynthetic studies, par- ticularly for the determination of the sites of primary and secondary metabolism of some secondary plant products. Alkaloid formation by grafted plants has been extensively studied in Nicotiana and the tropane alkaloid-producing Solanaceae. Thus, tomato scions grafted on to Datura stocks accumulate tropane alka- loids, whereas Datura scions on tomato stocks contain only a small amount of tropane alkaloids. This suggests the main site of alkaloid synthesis to be the Datura roots. However, interspecific grafts involv- ing D. ferox and D. stramonium demonstrate that secondary modifi- cations of alkaloids do occur in the aerial parts of these plants. This has been demonstrated conclusively by feeding alkaloid-free scions of D. ferox on Cyphomandra betacea stocks with hyoscyamine; on sub- sequent analysis, hyoscine was isolated from the leaves. More details of this conversion are given in the appropriate section. In other genera it has been shown by grafts involving tomato that the alkaloid anabasine is produced in the leaves of Nicotiana glauca, nicotine in the roots of N. tabacum and the pungent principle of capsi- cum, capsaicin, in the developing fruits. Reciprocal grafts of high and low resin-yielding strains of Cannabis have shown this biochemical character to be determined by the aerial parts. mutant strains Large numbers of mutant strains of microorganisms have been pro- duced which lack a particular enzyme, which results in their metab- olism being blocked at a particular stage. Such an organism may accumulate the intermediate compound immediately before the block and for its survival may require an artificial supply of another interme- diate which arises after the block. Such organisms are obviously useful materials in biosynthetic studies and have proved of major importance in some investigations. A mutant of Lactobacillus acidophilus, by its ability to utilize a con- stituent of ‘brewer’s solubles’ but not acetate, led to the isolation of mevalonic acid, an important intermediate of the isoprenoid compound pathway. Ultraviolet-induced mutants of ergot auxotrophic with respect to a number of amino acids have been produced; cultures of these have been used to inoculate rye and the resulting alkaloid contents of the sclerotia have been investigated. Gibberella mutants have been used to obtain novel isoprenoid compounds. With higher plants, in spite of repeated attempts with chemicals and irradiation, less success has been obtained in producing mutants useful for the study of biogenesis of therapeutically active compounds; the production of mature haploid plants from cell cultures of pollen (see Chapter 14) may offer a more satisfactory starting material for future work. further reading Harborne JB 1998 Phytochemical methods—a guide to modern techniques. Chapman and Hall (now under Kluwer Academic Publishers imprint), Dordrecht, Nl Houghton PJ, Raman A 1998 Laboratory handbook for the fractionation of natural products. Chapman and Hall (now under Kluwer Academic Publishers imprint), Dordrecht, Nl Khaledi MG 1998 High performance capillary electrophoresis. J. Wiley, New York, NY Meyer V 1999 Practical high-performance liquid chromatography, 3rd edn. J. Wiley, Chichester, UK Mukhopadhyay M 2000 Natural extracts using supercritical carbon dioxide. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL Phillipson JD 2007 Phytochemistry and pharmacognosy. Phytochemistry 68: 2960–2972. Review with 63 references Reich E, Schibli A 2007 High-performance TLC for the analysis of medicinal plants. Thieme, Stuttgart Taylor LT 1996 Supercritical fluid extraction. J. Wiley and Sons, New York, NY Wagner H, Bladt S, Rickl V 2003 Plant drug analysis. A thin-layer chromatography atlas. Springer, Berlin