562 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS Daunorubicin citrate liposome injection (DaunoXome, Gilead Sciences) is an aqueous solution of daunorubicin citrate encapsulated with liposomes composed of dis­ tearoyl phosphatidylcholine and cholesterol (2:1 molar ratio), with a mean diameter of about 45 nm (range 35 to 65 nm). The weight ratio of lipid to drug is 18.7:1 (total lipid-daunorubicin base), equivalent to a 10:5:1 molar ratio of distearoyl phosphatidylcholine, cholesterol, and daunorubicin, respectively. DaunoXome is formulated to maximize the selectiv­ ity of daunorubicin for solid tumors in situ. The liposo­ mal formulation helps to protect the daunorubicin from chemical and enzymatic degradation, minimizes protein binding, and generally decreases uptake by normal tissues. The product should be diluted 1:1 with 5% dextrose injection prior to administration. Each vial contains the equivalent of 50 mg daunorubicin base at a concentra­ tion of 2 mg/mL after preparation; it is recommended to be diluted to 1 mg/mL for administration. The only fluid recommended for preparation is 5% dextrose injection; it must not be mixed with a solution containing sodium chlo­ ride or benzyl alcohol or with any other solution. An inline filter should not be used for the intravenous infusion of DaunoXome. The final product appears as a red translucent dispersion ofliposomes that does scatter light, but it should not be used if it appears opaque or has precipitate or foreign matter in it. It should be stored in a refrigerator (2°C to 8°C; 36°F to 46°F); do not freeze and protect from light (11). Stealth Liposomes Liposome research has resulted in liposomes that avoid detection by the body's immune system, specifically the cells of the RES. These liposomes are known as "stealth liposomes" and are prepared with PEG on the outside of the membrane. The PEG coating, which is inert in the body, allows for longer circulatory life for the drug deliv­ ery mechanism. In addition to the PEG coating, most stealth liposomes also have some type of biological spe­ cies attached as a ligand to the liposome in order to enable binding via a specific expression on the targeted drug delivery site. These targeting ligands could be monoclonal antibodies (making an immunoliposome), vitamins, or specific antigens. Targeted liposomes can target nearly any cell type in the body and deliver drugs that would naturally be systemically delivered. Naturally toxic drugs can be much less toxic if delivered only to diseased tissues. In case of tumor development, certain anticancer drugs like doxorubicin (Doxil) and daunorubicin are provided through liposomes. Doxorubicin hydrochloride (Doxil) liposome injection consists of the drug encapsulated in stealth liposomes for intravenous administration. Doxorubicin is a cytotoxic anthracycline antibiotic that is isolated from Streptomyces peucetius var. caesius. The product is available as a sterile translucent red liposomal dispersion containing in each 10-mL single-use glass vial 20 mg doxorubicin HCl at a pH of 6.5. The stealth liposomes consist of 3.19 mg/mL of N-(carbonyl-methoxypolyethylene glycol 2000)-1,2-dis tearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine sodium salt, 9.58 mg/mL of fully hydrogenated soy phosphatidylcho­ line, and 3.19 mg/mL of cholesterol; also, each milliliter contains approximately 2 mg ammonium sulfate along with histidine as a buffer, sucrose for tonicity, and hydro­ chloric acid and/or sodium hydroxide for adjustment of pH. The doxorubicin is at least 90% encapsulated in the stealth liposomes. These stealth liposomes are protected from detection by the mononuclear phagocyte system by the coating with surface-bound methoxy PEG; this increases blood circulation time. These liposomes have a half-life of approximately 55 hours in humans (12). I PEGYLATED DOSAGE FORMS N eulasta (pegfilgrastim) is a covalent conjugate of re com - binant methionyl human granulocyte colony-stimu­ lating factor (G-CSF) (filgrastim) and monomethoxy PEG. Filgrastim is a water-soluble 175-amino acid pro­ tein obtained from bacterial fermentation of a strain of Escherichia coli; it has a molecular weight of approximately 19 kDa. Pegfilgrastim is produced by covalently bonding a 20-kDa PEG molecule to the N-terminal methionyl residue of filgrastim, resulting in an average molecular weight of pegfilgrastim of approximately 39 kDa. Neulasta is avail­ able in 0.6-mL prefilled syringes for subcutaneous injec­ tion. The syringe contains 6 mg of pegfilgrastim (based on protein weight) in a clear, colorless, sterile, preservative­ free solution containing 0.35 mg acetate, 30 mg sorbitol, 0.02 mg polysorbate 20, and 0.02 mg sodium in water for injection; the pH of the injection is 4.0. Pegasys (peginterferon alfa-2a), used in the treatment of hepatitis C virus, is a covalent conjugate of recombinant alfa-2a interferon (molecular weight -20 kDa) with a single­ branched bis-PEG chain of approximately 40-kDa molecular weight. The PEG moiety is linked at a single site to the inter­ feron alfa moiety via a stable amide bond to lysine; the final product has an approximate molecular weight of 60 kDa. Each vial of Pegasys contains approximately 1.2 mL of solution to deliver 1 mL of drug for subcutaneous admin­ istration. The 1-mL volume delivers 180 mg of drug prod­ uct (expressed as the amount of interferon alfa-2a), 8 mg sodium chloride, 0.05 mg polysorbate 80, 10 mg benzyl alcohol, 2.62 mg sodium acetate trihydrate, and 0.05 mg acetic acid; the solution has a pH of 6.0 ± 0.01 and is color­ less to light yellow. Pegasys produces maximal serum concentrations at 72 to 96 hours after dosing that are sustained for up to 168 hours. In comparison to Roferon-A, the mean systemic clearance for Pegasys was 94 mL/h, which is approximately one-hun­ dredth of that for Roferon. The mean terminal half-life after subcutaneous dosing in patients with chronic hepatitis C was 80 hours (range 50 to 140 hours) compared to 5.1 hours (range 3.7 to 8.5 hours) for Roferon-A (13).