PhyTochemisTRy 140 17 fluids, particularly carbon dioxide, as the mobile phase in liquid chro- matography. The low viscosity of the supercritical liquid provides a faster flow rate than standard HPLC and higher diffusivity of the materials to be separated. The plate height in the column, the length of the column and the time required for a particular separation are all reduced compared with the established technique. Sharper elution peaks give increased separation efficiency. Waste-disposal of used solvents is eliminated. Changes to the instrumental set-up have been devised to accommodate the properties of a supercritical liquid. counter-current extraction This is a liquid–liquid extraction process and the principles involved are similar to those of partition chromatography. Developed by Craig in 1944, the extraction machine used (for that time) small amounts of extract and overcame the tedious multiple extraction processes then employed. Now, however, for research purposes, only the smallest of samples for fractionation and analysis are required, making the use of the cumbersome counter-current apparatus largely unnecessary. Briefly, a lower, stationary phase is contained in a series of tubes and an upper, moving immiscible liquid is transferred from tube to tube along the series, the immiscible liquids being shaken and allowed to separate between each transference. The mixture to be fractionated is placed in the first tube containing the immiscible liquids and the appar- atus is agitated and the layers are allowed to separate. The components of the mixture will be distributed between the two layers according to their partition coefficients. The upper phase is moved along to the second tube containing lower phase and more moving phase is brought into contact with the lower phase of tube 1. Shaking and transference again takes place and continues along a sufficient number of tubes to give a fractionation of the mixture. The applications of counter-current extraction covered many fields of plant chemistry, including alkaloids, amino acids, antibiotics, anti- tumour compounds, phenols including anthraquinone derivatives, car- diac glycosides, essential oils, fatty acids, plant auxins, prostaglandins, steroids and vitamins. Other more recent developments involving the counter-current principle are high-speed counter-current chromatography (planet coil centrifugal CCC), droplet counter-current chromatography (DCCC) and centrifugal droplet CCC. Details of these can be found in the 15th edition of this book. For a review (245 refs) giving the background and up-to- date methodology employed in the counter-current separation of natural products see G. F. Pauli et al., J. Nat. Prod., 2008, 71, 1489–1508. thin-layer chromatography In 1958 Stahl demonstrated the wide applicability of TLC, a technique which had been known in principle for many years but was never developed. It has now achieved remarkable success in the separation of mixtures of all classes of natural products and is established as an analytical tool in modern pharmacopoeias. In outline the method consists of preparing, on a suitable glass plate, a thin layer of material, the sorbent, which may be either an adsor- bent as used in column adsorption chromatography or an inert support which holds an aqueous phase as in column partition chromatography. The mixtures to be resolved are dissolved in a suitable solvent and placed as a series of spots on the film towards one end of the plate; this end is then dipped in a suitable solvent mixture and the whole enclosed in an airtight container. The solvent front travels up the film and after a suitable time the plate is removed, the solvent front is marked, the solvent is allowed to evaporate and the positions of the separated compounds are determined by suitable means. TLC has certain advantages over paper chromatography. Fractio n ations can be effected more rapidly with smaller quantities of the mixture; the separated spots are usually more compact and more clearly demarcated from one another; and the nature of the film is often such that drastic reagents, such as concentrated sulphuric acid, which would destroy a paper chromatogram, can be used for the location of separated substances. With adsorption TLC various substances exhibit different adsorptive capacities and any one material may vary in its activity according to the pretreatment. The adsorbent must be chosen in relation to the properties of the solvent and the mixture to be fractionated. In general, for a given substance, if a highly active adsorbent is used, then a solvent with a corre- spondingly high power of elution for this substance is required. Alumina (acid, basic and neutral) of different activity grades is very commonly employed. In order to produce a film with reasonable handling proper- ties, the adsorbent may be mixed with about 12% of its weight of cal- cium sulphate (CaSO4.1/2H2O) to act as a binder. Ready-mixed powders are obtainable commercially; they require mixing with a given quantity of water and the slurry needs to be spread by a mechanical device or with a glass rod on to glass plates. The film sets within a few minutes and is then activated by heating at a suitable temperature (105°C for 30 min is common). Commercial ready-spread plates are available. The thickness of the film is characteristically of the order of 250 μm, but for prepara- tive work layers of up to several millimetres thickness are employed. The thick films must be carefully dried to avoid cracks. Solutions of substances to be examined are applied to the film with the aid of capillary tubes or, for quantitative work, with microsyringes and micrometer pipettes which permit volumes to be read off to ±0.05 μl. A useful innovation for applying steam-volatile components of a powdered drug directly to a thin-layer plate is the Stahl TAS oven. The drug sample is placed in a cartridge together with a suitable propellant (e.g. hydrated silica gel) and inserted in the TAS oven maintained at a predetermined temperature. The tapered exit of the cartridge is situated a short distance from the base-line of a TLC plate and ‘steam-distilled’ components from the drug are deposited ready for immediate development (for illustration see 12th edition). Stahl (Planta Med., 1976, 29, 1) has described a devel- opment of this apparatus whereby 18 samples can be simultaneously deposited on a plate under uniform conditions. A more recent applica- tion has involved the study of tannin-containing drugs. The solvents used for running the chromatogram must be pure, and com- mon ones are methanol, ethanol and other alcohols, chloroform, ether, ethyl acetate, n-hexane, cyclohexane, petroleum spirit and mixtures of these. For routine assays automatic multiple development with polarity graduation of the developing solvent can be used. It must be remembered that chloro- form ordinarily contains up to 1% of ethanol, which gives it quite differ- ent elution properties from those of pure chloroform. Benzene, formerly frequently used as a component of the mobile phase, has now for health reasons been routinely replaced with other non-polar solvents. Similarly, inhalation of chloroform-containing mixtures should be avoided. TLC, which involves the partition of a substance between two immiscible phases, is again analogous to the column procedure and to paper chromatography. In the latter, the hydration shell of the cel- lulose fibres forms the stationary phase and thin-layer chromatograms utilizing powdered cellulose give comparable results. Kieselguhr and silica gel are also commonly employed, and their properties as thin layers can be modified by the inclusion of acids, bases and buffer solu- tions. The thin layers may also include a substance fluorescent in ultra- violet light and this facilitates the detection of solutes which cause a quenching of the background fluorescence. Much used is Kieselgel GF254 ‘Merck’ which gives a background green fluorescence when irradiated with ultraviolet light of wavelength 254 nm. Small quantities of ammonia solution, diethylamine, acetic acid, dimethylformamide and pyridine are often present as constituents of the developing sol- vents for silica plates. Other layers used include polyamide, which is particularly suitable for phenolic compounds, ‘Sephadex’ (Pharmacia,