Three-Dimensional Quantitative Structure–Activity Relationships With molecular modeling becoming more common, the QSAR paradigm that traditionally used physicochemical de- scriptors on a two-dimensional molecule can be adapted to 3D space. Essentially, the method requires knowledge of the 3D shape of the molecule. Accurate modeling of the mole- cule is crucial. A reference (possibly the prototype molecule) or shape is selected against which all other molecules are compared. The original method called for overlapping the test molecules with the reference molecule and minimizing the differences in overlap. Then, distances were calculated between arbitrary locations on the molecule. These distances were used as variables in QSAR regression equations. Although overlapping rigid ring systems such as tetracy- clines, steroids, and penicillins are relatively easy, flexible molecules can prove challenging. Examine the following hy- pothetical molecule. Depending on the size of the various R groups and the type of atom represented by X, a family of compounds represented by this molecule could have various conformations. Even when the conformations might be known with reasonable certainty, the reference points crucial for activity must be identified. Is the overlap involving the tetrahedral carbon important for activity? Or should the five- membered ring provide the reference points? And which way should it be rotated? Assuming that Rb is an important part of the pharmacophore, should the five-membered ring be ro- tated so that Rb is pointed down or up? These are not trivial questions, and successful 3D-QSAR studies have depended on just how the investigator positions the molecules relative to each other. There are several instances in which appar- ently very similar structures have been shown to bind to a given receptor in different orientations. There are various algorithms for measuring the degree of conformational and shape similarities, including molecular shape analysis (MSA),30 distance geometry,31 and molecu- lar similarity matrices.32,33 Many of the algorithms use graph theory, in which the bonds that connect the atoms of a molecule can be thought of as paths between specific points on the molecule. Molecular connectivity is a com- monly used application of graph theory.34–36 Besides comparing how well a family of molecules overlaps with a reference molecule, there are sophisticated software packages that determine the physicochemical pa- rameters located at specific distances from the surface of the molecule. An example of this approach is comparative mo- lecular field analysis (CoMFA).37,38 The hypothetical mole- cule is placed in a grid (Fig. 2.24) and its surface sampled at a specified distance. The parameter types include steric, Lennard-Jones potentials and other quantum chemical pa- rameters, electrostatic and steric parameters, and partition coefficients. The result is thousands of independent vari- ables. Standard regression analysis requires that the dimen- sionality be reduced and rigorous tests of validity be used. Partial least squares (PLS) has been the most common statistical method used. Elegant as the CoMFA algorithm is for explaining ligand–receptor interactions for a set of molecules, the method alone does not readily point the 36 Wilson and Gisvold’s Textbook of Organic Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry Figure 2.24 Molecule situated in a CoMFA grid.