The fact that these drug groups act by different mechanisms permits the combination of drugs from two or more groups with increased efficacy and, in some cases, decreased toxicity. (See Box: Resistant Hypertension & Polypharmacy.) Resistant Hypertension & Polypharmacy Many patients with hypertension require two or more drugs acting by different mechanisms (polypharmacy). According to some estimates, up to 40% of patients may respond inadequately even to two agents and are considered to have “resistant hypertension.” Some of these patients have treatable secondary hypertension that has been missed, but most do not, and three or more drugs are required. One rationale for polypharmacy in hypertension is that most drugs evoke compensatory regulatory mechanisms for maintaining blood pressure (see Figures 6–7 and 11–1), which may markedly limit their effect. For example, vasodilators such as hydralazine cause a significant decrease in peripheral vascular resistance, but evoke a strong compensatory tachycardia and salt and water retention (Figure 11–4) that are capable of almost completely reversing their effect. The addition of a β blocker prevents the tachycardia; addition of a diuretic (eg, hydrochlorothiazide) prevents the salt and water retention. In effect, all three drugs increase the sensitivity of the cardiovascular system to each other’s actions. A second reason is that some drugs have only modest maximum efficacy but reduction of long­term morbidity mandates their use. Many studies of angiotensin­converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors report a maximal lowering of blood pressure of less than 10 mm Hg. In patients with more severe hypertension (pressure >160/100 mm Hg), this is inadequate to prevent all the sequelae of hypertension, but ACE inhibitors have important long­ term benefits in preventing or reducing renal disease in diabetic persons and in reduction of heart failure. Finally, the toxicity of some effective drugs prevents their use at maximally effective doses. Two approaches to treating hypertension can be considered. One may start with monotherapy, and if hypertension does not respond adequately to a regimen of one drug, a second drug from a different class with a different mechanism of action and different pattern of toxicity is added. If the