Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic syndrome (HHS) is diagnosed in persons with type 2 diabetes and is characterized by profound hyperglycemia and dehydration. It is associated with inadequate oral hydration, especially in elderly patients; with other illnesses; with the use of medication that elevates the blood sugar or causes dehydration, such as phenytoin, steroids, diuretics, and calcium channel blockers; and with peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis. The diagnostic hallmarks are declining mental status and even seizures, a plasma glucose >600 mg/dL, and a calculated serum osmolality >320 mmol/L. Persons with HHS are not acidotic unless DKA is also present. The treatment of HHS centers around aggressive rehydration and restoration of glucose and electrolyte homeostasis; the rate of correction of these variables must be monitored closely. Low­dose insulin therapy may be required. Chronic Complications of Diabetes Late clinical manifestations of diabetes mellitus include a number of pathologic changes that involve small and large blood vessels, cranial and peripheral nerves, the skin, and the eye. These lesions lead to hypertension, end­stage chronic kidney disease, blindness, autonomic and peripheral neuropathy, amputations of the lower extremities, myocardial infarction, and cerebrovascular accidents. These late manifestations correlate with the duration of the diabetic state after the onset of puberty and glycemic control. In type 1 diabetes, end­stage chronic kidney disease develops in up to 40% of patients, compared with less than 20% of patients with type 2 diabetes. Proliferative retinopathy ultimately develops in both types of diabetes but has a slightly higher prevalence in type 1 patients (25% after 15 years’ duration). In patients with type 1 diabetes, complications from end­stage chronic kidney disease are a major cause of death, whereas patients with type 2 diabetes are more likely to have macrovascular diseases leading to myocardial infarction and stroke as the main causes of death. Tobacco use adds significantly to the risk of both microvascular and macrovascular complications inpatients with diabetes. SUMMARY Drugs Used for Diabetes Subclass, Drug Mechanism of Action Effects Clinical Applications Pharmacokinetics, Adverse Effects INSULINS Rapid­acting: Lispro, aspart, glulisine, inhaled, lispro + tresprostinil & citrate regular, aspart + niacinamide Short­acting: Regular Intermediate­ acting: NPH Long­acting: Detemir, glargine, degludec, icodec Activate insulin receptor Reduce circulating glucose Type 1 and type 2 diabetes Parenteral (SC or IV [regular]) • duration varies (see text) • Adverse effects: Hypoglycemia, weight gain, lipodystrophy (rare) SULFONYLUREAS Glipizide Glyburide Glimepiride Gliclazide1 Insulin secretagogues: Close K+ channels in beta Reduce circulating glucose in patients with functioning beta cells Type 2 diabetes Oral • duration 10–24 h • Adverse effects: Hypoglycemia, weight gain