104 SECTION 2 | Cardiovascular Disorders • The ACC/AHA guidelines recommend use of β-blockers in all stable patients with HFrEF in the absence of contraindications or a clear history of β-blocker intolerance. Patients should receive a β-blocker even if symptoms are mild or well controlled with other GDMT. It is not essential that doses of other agents be optimized before a β-blocker is started because the addition of a β-blocker is likely to be of greater benefit than an increase in the dose of other medications. • β-Blockers are also recommended for asymptomatic persons with a reduced LVEF (stage B) to decrease the risk of progression to HF. • Carvedilol, metoprolol succinate (CR/XL), and bisoprolol are the only β-blockers shown to reduce mortality in large HF trials. Because bisoprolol is not available in the necessary starting dose of 1.25 mg, the choice is typically limited to either carvedilol or metoprolol succinate. Target doses are those associated with reductions in mortal- ity in placebo-controlled clinical trials (Table 9-1). • Initiate β-blockers in stable patients who have no or minimal evidence of fluid over- load. Because of their negative inotropic effects, start β-blockers in very low doses with slow upward dose titration to avoid symptomatic worsening or acute decompen- sation. Doses should be doubled no more often than every 2 weeks, as tolerated, until the target or maximally tolerated dose is reached. • Inform patients that β-blocker therapy is expected to positively influence disease progression and survival even if there is little symptomatic improvement. In addition, dose titration is a long, gradual process; response to therapy may be delayed; and HF symptoms may actually worsen during the initiation period. • Adverse effects include bradycardia or heart block, hypotension, fatigue, impaired glycemic control in diabetic patients, bronchospasm in patients with asthma, and worsening HF. Absolute contraindications include uncontrolled bronchospastic dis- ease, symptomatic bradycardia, advanced heart block without a pacemaker, and acute decompensated HF. However, β-blockers may be tried with caution in patients with asymptomatic bradycardia, COPD, or well-controlled asthma. Aldosterone Antagonists • Spironolactone and eplerenone block mineralocorticoid receptors, the target for aldosterone. In the kidney, aldosterone antagonists inhibit sodium reabsorption and potassium excretion. However, diuretic effects with low doses are minimal, suggest- ing that their therapeutic benefits result from other actions. In the heart, aldosterone antagonists inhibit cardiac extracellular matrix and collagen deposition, thereby attenuating cardiac fibrosis and ventricular remodeling. Aldosterone antagonists also attenuate the systemic proinflammatory state, atherogenesis, and oxidative stress caused by aldosterone. • Current guidelines recommend adding a low-dose aldosterone antagonist to standard therapy to improve symptoms, reduce the risk of HF hospitalization, and increase survival in select patients provided that serum potassium and renal function can be carefully monitored. Guidelines recommend adding an aldosterone antagonist to decrease the risk for hospitalization for HF in patients with HFpEF, especially if plasma natriuretic peptide levels are elevated. • Start with low doses (spironolactone 12.5 mg/day or eplerenone 25 mg/day) espe- cially in older persons and those with diabetes or a creatinine clearance <50 mL/ min/1.73m2 (0.48 mL/sec/m2) (Table 9-1). • Avoid aldosterone antagonists in patients with renal impairment, elevated serum potassium (>5 mEq/L [mmol/L]), or history of severe hyperkalemia. Spironolactone also interacts with androgen and progesterone receptors, which may lead to gyneco- mastia, impotence, and menstrual irregularities in some patients. Sodium -Glucose Cotransporter Type 2 (SGLT2) Inhibitors • SLGT2 inhibitors inhibit glucose and sodium reabsoprtion in the proximal kidney tubules, which leads to osmotic diuresis and natriuresis, reduction in arterial pressure and stiffness, and a shift to ketone-based myocardial metabolism.