and transient dizziness (Monday disease). After a day or so, these symptoms disappear owing to the development of tolerance. Over the weekend, when exposure to the chemicals is eliminated, tolerance disappears, so symptoms recur each Monday. Other hazards of industrial exposure, including dependence, have been reported. There is no evidence that physical dependence develops as a result of the therapeutic use of short­acting nitrates for angina, even in large doses. C. Carcinogenicity of Nitrate and Nitrite Derivatives Nitrosamines are small molecules with the structure R2–N–NO formed from the combination of nitrates and nitrites with amines. Some nitrosamines are powerful carcinogens in animals, apparently through conversion to reactive derivatives. Although there is no direct proof that these agents cause cancer in humans, there is a strong epidemiologic correlation between the incidence of esophageal and gastric carcinoma and the nitrate content of food in certain cultures. Nitrosamines are also found in tobacco and in cigarette smoke. There is no evidence that the small doses of nitrates used in the treatment of angina result in significant body levels of nitrosamines. Mechanisms of Clinical Effect The beneficial and deleterious effects of nitrate­induced vasodilation are summarized in Table 12–2. TABLE 12–2 Beneficial and deleterious effects of nitrates in the treatment of angina. Effect Mechanism and Result Potential beneficial effects Decreased ventricular volume Decreased arterial pressure Decreased ejection time Decreased work and myocardial oxygen requirement Vasodilation of epicardial coronary arteries Relief of coronary artery spasm Increased collateral flow Improved perfusion of ischemic myocardium Decreased left ventricular diastolic pressure Improved subendocardial perfusion Potential deleterious effects Reflex tachycardia Increased myocardial oxygen requirement; decreased diastolic perfusion time and coronary perfusion Reflex increase in contractility Increased myocardial oxygen requirement A. Nitrate Effects in Angina of Effort Decreased venous return to the heart and the resulting reduction of intracardiac volume are important beneficial hemodynamic effects of nitrates. Arterial pressure also decreases. Decreased intraventricular pressure and left ventricular volume are associated with decreased wall tension (Laplace relation) and decreased myocardial oxygen requirement. In rare instances, a paradoxical increase in myocardial oxygen demand may occur as a result of excessive reflex tachycardia and increased contractility. Intracoronary, intravenous, or sublingual nitrate administration consistently increases the caliber of the large epicardial coronary arteries except where blocked by concentric atheromas. Coronary arteriolar resistance tends to decrease, though to a lesser extent. However, nitrates administered by the usual systemic routes may decrease overall coronary blood flow (and myocardial oxygen consumption) if cardiac output is reduced due to