reducing the drug exposure of nontarget cells. This is still largely based on Paul Ehrlich's magic bullet concept. New drug delivery systems can provide improved or unique clinical benefits, such as (a) improvement of the patient's compliance, (b) improved outcomes, (c) reduc­ tion of adverse effects, (d) improvement of the patient's acceptance of the treatment, (e) avoidance of costly inter­ ventions such as laboratory services, (f) allowing the patients to receive medication as outpatients, and possibly (g) a reduction in the overall use of medicinal resources. Novel drug delivery systems can include those based on physical mechanisms and those based on biochemi­ cal mechanisms. Physical mechanisms, also referred to as controlled drug delivery systems, include osmosis, diffusion, erosion, dissolution, and electrotransport. Biochemical mechanisms include monoclonal antibodies, gene therapy and vector systems, polymer drug abducts, and liposomes. Therapeutic benefits of some of the new drug delivery systems include optimization of the duration of action of the drug, decreasing dosage frequency, controlling the site of release, and maintaining constant drug levels. Safety benefits include reducing adverse effects, decreasing the number of concomitant medications a patient must take, decreasing the need for interventions, and reducing the number of emergency department visits. Economic ben­ efits of novel drug delivery systems include simplifying administration regimens, enhancing the patient's compli­ ance, and an overall reduction of health care costs. I COMPOSITION Associated with the various mechanisms that are charac­ teristic of or the basis of the newer drug delivery systems, their composition can be quite variable-ranging from naturally derived substances, such as gelatin and sugars, to the more complex polymers. New drug delivery systems also incorporate mechanical, electronic, and computer components. The therapeutic efficacy of selected products can be enhanced, and in some cases, the toxicity can be decreased by incorporating novel polymer technology. For example, degradable bonds can be used to attach an active drug to a synthetic or naturally occurring polymer. Upon delivery to the target site and in the presence of certain enzymes or through hydrolysis or a comparable mechanism, the prod­ uct can be cleaved, releasing the active drug at a specific site of action. Oral, topical, parenteral, and implantable drugs have the potential to be used with this approach. A number of release profiles using polymers are pos­ sible, as are actual penetration into specific tissues and selection of specific target sites. Potential problems of polymers include the following: (a) Their high molecular weight may cause them to be very slowly excreted from the body. (b) Because of their size, permeability through various membranes may be slow. (c) Immunologic or toxic reactions may occur. (d) Because they are complex, they C HAPTE R 20 Novel Dosage Forms and Drug Delivery Technologies 551 may be labor intensive and expensive to develop. Novel drug delivery systems will be discussed in the general categories of topical, oral, vaginal, implanted, ophthalmic, and parenteral preparations. I TOPICAL ADMINISTRATION The basis for the development of transdermal drug delivery systems (patches) involves percutaneous absorp­ tion. See Chapters 10 and 11 for background informa­ tion on transdermal systems and penetration enhancers. Novel topical systems also include iontophoresis (IP) and phonophoresis. lontophoresis IP is an electrochemical method that enhances the trans­ port of some solute molecules by creating a potential gra­ dient through the skin with an applied electrical current or voltage. It induces increased migration of ionic drugs into the skin by electrostatic repulsion at the active electrode: Negative ions are delivered by the cathode and positive ions by the anode. A typical IP device consists of a battery, microprocessor controller, drug reservoir, and electrodes. Advantages of IP include (a) control of the delivery rates by variations of current density, pulsed voltage, drug con­ centration, and ionic strength; (b) eliminating gastroin­ testinal incompatibility, erratic absorption, and first-pass metabolism; (c) reducing side effects and variation among patients; (d) avoiding the risks of infection, inflammation, and fibrosis associated with continuous injection or infu­ sion; and (e) enhancing compliance with a convenient and noninvasive therapeutic regimen. The main disadvantage of IP is skin irritation at high current densities; this can be eliminated or minimized by reducing the current. IP is gaining increasing acceptance in the pharmaceu­ tical industry with small, efficient iontophoretic patches projected to be on the market within the next few years. Miniaturization is now possible with smaller, more pow­ erful batteries and electronics. The next generation of IP patch may also include an electronic record of the date, time, and quantity of each dose delivered, providing infor­ mation for determining patient compliance. Also, units may soon be capable of reverse IP that serves to collect a sample noninvasively and determine the analyte levels in the body with feedback mechanisms for dosing. Currently, however, most IP involves the use of an iontophoretic device attached to electrodes containing a solution of the drug. As previously mentioned, IP involves the use of small amounts of physiologically acceptable electric current to move charged, or ionized, drugs through the skin. Placing an ionized solution of the drug in an electrode of the same charge and applying a current repel the drug from the elec­ trode into the skin. This method of drug delivery has been around for at least 100 years. Since the 1930s, IP of pilo­ carpine has been used to induce sweating in the diagnosis