CHAPTER 5 Dosage Form Design: Biopharmaceutical and Pharmacokinetic Considerations 135 common for a metastable form of a medicinal agent to change form even in a completed pharmaceutical prepa­ ration, although the time required for a complete change may exceed the normal shelf life of the product. However, from a pharmaceutical point of view, any change in the crystal structure of a medicinal agent may critically affect the stability and even the therapeutic efficacy of the prod­ uct in which the conversion takes place. The various polymorphic forms of the same chemical generally differ in many physical properties, including solubility and dissolution, which are of prime importance to the rate and extent of absorption. These differences are manifest so long as the drug is in the solid state. Once solution is effected, the different forms become indis­ tinguishable one from another. Therefore, differences in drug action, pharmaceutically and therapeutically, can be expected from polymorphs contained in solid dosage forms as well as in liquid suspension. The use of meta­ stable forms generally results in higher solubility and dis­ solution rates than does that of the respective stable crystal forms of the same drug. If all other factors remain con­ stant, more rapid and complete drug absorption will likely result from the metastable forms than from the stable form of the same drug. On the other hand, the stable polymorph is more resistant to chemical degradation and, because of its lower solubility, is frequently preferred in pharmaceu­ tical suspensions of insoluble drugs. If metastable forms are employed in the preparation of suspensions, their gradual conversion to the stable form may be accompa­ nied by an alteration in the consistency of the suspension itself, which affects its permanency. In all instances, the advantages of the metastable crystalline forms in terms of increased physiologic availability of the drug must be bal­ anced against the increased product stability when stable polymorphs are employed. Sulfur and cortisone acetate exist in more than one crystalline form and are frequently prepared in pharmaceutical suspensions. In fact, corti­ sone acetate is reported to exist in at least five crystalline forms. It is possible for the commercial products of two manufacturers to differ in stability and therapeutic effect, depending on the crystalline form of the drug used in the formulation. Salt Forms The dissolution rate of a salt form of a drug is generally quite different from that of the parent compound. Sodium and potassium salts of weak organic acids and hydrochlo­ ride salts of weak organic bases dissolve much more read­ ily than do the respective free acids or bases. The result is a more rapid saturation of the diffusion layer surrounding the dissolving particle and the consequent more rapid dif­ fusion of the drug to the absorption sites. Numerous examples could be cited to demonstrate the increased rate of drug dissolution due to the use of the salt form of the drug rather than the free acid or base, but the following will suffice: the addition of the ethylenediamine moiety to theophylline increases the water solubility of theophylline fivefold. The use of the ethylenediamine salt of theophylline has allowed the development of oral aque­ ous solutions of theophylline and diminished the need to use hydroalcoholic mixtures such as elixirs. Other Factors The state of hydration of a drug molecule can affect its solubility and pattern of absorption. Usually, the anhy­ drous form of an organic molecule is more readily soluble than is the hydrated form. This characteristic was dem - onstrated with the drug ampicillin, when the anhydrous form was found to have a greater rate of solubility than the trihydrate form (4). The rate of absorption for the anhydrous form was greater than that for the trihydrate form of the drug. A drug's solubility in the gastrointestinal tract can be affected not only by the pH of the environment but also by the normal components of the tract and any foodstuffs. A drug may interact with one of the other agents present to form a chemical complex that may result in reduced drug solubility and decreased drug absorption. The clas­ sic example of this complexation is the one between tetracycline analogs and certain cations, for example, cal­ cium, magnesium, and aluminum, resulting in decreased absorption of the tetracycline derivative. Also, if the drug becomes adsorbed onto insoluble material in the tract, its availability for absorption may be correspondingly reduced. I BIOAVAILABILITY AND BIOEQUIVALENCE The term bioavailability describes the rate and extent to which an active drug ingredient or therapeutic moiety is absorbed from a drug product and becomes available at the site of action. The term bioequivalence refers to the comparison of bioavailabilities of different formulations, drug products, or batches of the same drug product. The availability to the biologic system of a pharmaceuti­ cal product is integral to the goals of dosage form design and paramount to the effectiveness of the medication. The study of a drug's bioavailability depends on the drug's absorption or entry into the systemic circulation, and it is necessary to study the pharmacokinetic profile of the drug or its metabolite or metabolites over time in the appro­ priate biologic system, for example, blood, plasma, and urine. Graphically, bioavailability of a drug is portrayed by a concentration time curve of the administered drug in an appropriate tissue system, for example, plasma (Fig. 5.4). Bioavailability data are used to determine (a) the amount or proportion of drug absorbed from a formulation or dos­ age form, (b) the rate at which the drug was absorbed, (c) the duration of the drug's presence in the biologic fluid or tissue correlated with the patient's response, and (d) the relationship between drug blood levels and clinical effi­ cacy and toxicity.