566 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS In 1998, the FDA approved the combination of Zoladex (3.6- and 10.8-mg goserelin acetate depots) and Eulexin (flutamide) for the management of locally confined stage B2 to C prostate carcinoma. The treatment is initiated 8 weeks prior to radiation therapy and continued during radiation therapy. The treatment regimen for prostate cancer uses one 3.6-mg implant subcutaneously into the upper abdomen every 28 days or a 10.8-mg implant subcutaneously into the abdominal wall every 12 weeks. Goserelin is administered as a subcutaneous implant. Along with leuprolide acetate (Lupron Depot), it was one of the first polymer systems to have received FDA approval for controlled release of a peptide. This drug is available in a 3.6-mg biodegradable and biocompatible sterile white to cream-colored 1-mm by 1.5-mm cylinder about the size of a grain of rice preloaded into a special single-use syringe. The drug is dispersed in a matrix of D,L-lactic acid and glycolic acid copolymer. Histrelin (Vantas) Implant The Vantas (histrelin) implant is a sterile nonbiodegrad­ able, diffusion-controlled reservoir drug delivery system designed to deliver histrelin continuously for 12 months upon subcutaneous implantation. It contains 50 mg ofhis­ trelin acetate, a synthetic nonapeptide analog of the natu - rally occurring gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) or luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH). The device must be removed after 12 months, and another implant may be inserted to continue therapy. The sterile implant contains a 50-mg histrelin acetate drug core inside a nonbiodegradable, 3.5 cm by 3 mm cylindrically shaped hydrogel reservoir that also con­ tains stearic acid. The hydrogel reservoir consists of a hydrophilic polymer cartridge composed of 2-hydroxy­ ethyl methacrylate, 2-hydroxypropyl methacrylate, tri­ methylolpropane trimethacrylate, benzoin methyl ether, Perkadox-16, and Triton X-100. It is packaged in a glass vial containing 2 mL of 1.8% sodium chloride solution and is primed for release upon insertion (20). Leuprolide Acetate (Lupron, Lupron Depot-Ped, Lupron Depot-3 Month) Leuprolide is a synthetic GnRH analog. Like the naturally occurring LH-RH, initial and intermittent administration of this drug stimulates the release of LH and FSH from the anterior pituitary. As with goserelin, continuous admin­ istration of leuprolide suppresses the secretion of LH and FSH, with a concomitant drop in testosterone concentra­ tions and subsequent medical castration. The usual adult dose for prostatic carcinoma is a subcu­ taneous injection of 1 mg/d. There is also a monthly (every 28 to 33 days) depot intramuscular injection. The 7.5-mg strength is used for prostatic carcinoma. The powder for intramuscular injection is reconstituted with a special dilu­ ent composed ofn-mannitol, purified gelatin, D,L-lactic and glycolic acid copolymer, polysorbate 80, and acetic acid. Lupron should be refrigerated until dispensed, but patients may store the product at room temperature (no more than 30°C, or 86°F). The product should be protected from light and the vial stored in the carton until use. Following reconstitution, the suspension is stable for 1 day. However, because the product has no preservative, it should be discarded if not used immediately. Viadur Implant The Viadur (leuprolide acetate) implant is a sterile, non­ biodegradable, osmotically driven miniaturized implant designed to deliver leuprolide acetate for 12 months at a controlled rate. It contains 65 mg of leuprolide ( as 72 mg of the acetate), which is a synthetic nonapeptide analog of naturally occurring GnRH or LH-RH. After 12 months, the implant must be removed, and another may be inserted if indicated. Viadur is indicated in the pallia­ tive treatment of advanced prostate cancer. The drug is dissolved in 104 mg of dimethyl sulfoxide. The reservoir houses a polyurethane rate-controlling membrane, an elastomeric piston, and a polyethylene diffusion mod­ erator. The contained osmotic tablets are composed of sodium chloride, sodium carboxymethylcellulose, povi­ done, magnesium stearate, and sterile water for injection. PEG fills the space between the osmotic tablets and the reservoir. The implant weighs about 1.1 g. As aqueous fluid diffuses through the membrane and is slowly taken up by the osmotic tablets, the piston will move and force out a controlled amount of the drug through the diffusion moderator orifice (21). Vitrasert Implants Vitrasert implants contain 4.5 mg of the antiviral drug ganciclovir and are used to treat AIDS-related cytomega­ lovirus ( CMV) retinitis. Ganciclovir does not cure the CMV retinitis, but helps to decrease its progression. The dosage form is surgically implanted into the vitreous cavity of the eye in an outpatient intraocular procedure. Each implant contains 4.5 mg of ganciclovir, contains magnesium stearate (0.25%) as an inactive ingredient, and is embedded into a polymer-based system that slowly releases the drug over a 5- to 8-month period. Follow-up ophthalmological examinations are required, and the Vitrasert is removed and replaced with a new implant once the contents of the original implant have been depleted. The Vitrasert implant only treats the eye in which it has been implanted and does not demonstrate any systemic effect. Clinical trials reported adverse effects, for example, loss of visual acuity, vitreal hemorrhage, and retinal detachment, which were observed in 10% to 20% of patients. Most patients experienced a loss in visual acuity from 2 to 4 weeks after implantation. Currently, Vitrasert is pregnancy category C, and its use in pediatric patients less than 9 years of age has not been established. Vitrasert is associated with carcinogenicity and mutagenicity and should be handled and disposed of properly according to antineoplastic guidelines.