TABLE 12–6 New drugs or drug groups under investigation for use in angina. Amiloride Capsaicin Direct bradycardic agents, eg, ivabradine Inhibitors of slowly inactivating sodium current, eg, ranolazine Metabolic modulators, eg, trimetazidine Nitric oxide donors, eg, L­arginine Potassium channel activators, eg, nicorandil Protein kinase G facilitators, eg, detanonoate Rho­kinase inhibitors, eg, fasudil Sulfonylureas, eg, glibenclamide Thiazolidinediones Vasopeptidase inhibitors Xanthine oxidase inhibitors, eg, allopurinol Ranolazine appears to act by reducing a late sodium current (INa) that facilitates calcium entry via the sodium­calcium exchanger (see Chapter 13). The reduction in intracellular calcium concentration that results from ranolazine reduces diastolic tension, cardiac contractility, and work. Ranolazine is approved for use in angina in the USA. Several studies demonstrate its effectiveness in stable angina, but its ability to reduce the incidence of death in acute coronary syndromes is unclear. Ranolazine prolongs the QT interval in patients with coronary artery disease (but shortens it in patients with long QT syndrome, LQT3). It has not been associated with torsades de pointes arrhythmia and may inhibit the metabolism of digoxin and simvastatin. Certain metabolic modulators (eg, trimetazidine) are known as pFOX inhibitors because they partially inhibit the fatty acid oxidation pathway in myocardium. Because metabolism shifts to oxidation of fatty acids in ischemic myocardium, the oxygen requirement per unit of ATP produced increases. Partial inhibition of the enzyme required for fatty acid oxidation (long­chain 3­ketoacyl thiolase, LC­3KAT) appears to improve the metabolic status of ischemic tissue. (Ranolazine was initially assigned to this group of agents, but it lacks this action at clinically relevant concentrations.) Trimetazidine does inhibit LC­3KAT at achievable concentrations and has demonstrated efficacy in stable angina. However, it is not approved for use in the USA. Perhexiline was found to benefit some patients with angina decades ago but was abandoned because of reports of hepatotoxicity and peripheral neuropathy. However, pharmacokinetic studies suggested that toxicity was due to variable clearance of the drug, with extremely high plasma concentrations in patients with deficient CYP2D6 activity. This drug may shift myocardial metabolism from fatty acid oxidation to more efficient glucose oxidation (like trimetazidine). Because it does not involve vasodilation, it may be useful in patients refractory to ordinary medical therapy if plasma concentration is carefully controlled. Perhexiline is currently approved in only a few countries (not the USA). So­called bradycardic drugs, relatively selective If sodium channel blockers (eg, ivabradine), reduce cardiac rate by inhibiting the hyperpolarization­ activated sodium channel in the sinoatrial node. No other significant hemodynamic effects have been reported. Ivabradine appears to reduce anginal