∗See Table 41–5 for insulin preparations. Empagliflozin Jardiance Ertugliflozin Steglatro SODIUM GLUCOSE CO­TRANSPORTER INHIBITORS COMBINATION Dapagliflozin plus saxagliptin Qtern Empagliflozin plus linagliptin Glyxambi Empagliflozin plus linagliptin plus metformin Trijardy XR Ertuglifozin plus sitagliptin Staglujan MISCELLANEOUS DRUGS ISLET AMYLOID POLYPEPTIDE ANALOG Pramlintide Symlin BILE ACID SEQUESTRANT Colesevelam hydrochloride Welchol DOPAMINE RECEPTOR AGONIST Bromocriptine Generic, Parlodel, Cycloset GLUCAGON Glucagon Generic CASE STUDY ANSWER This patient had significant insulin resistance, taking about 125 units of insulin daily (approximately 1 unit per kilogram). He had received limited education on how to manage his diabetes. He had peripheral neuropathy, proteinuria, low HDL­cholesterol levels, and hypertension. The patient underwent multifactorial intervention targeting his weight, glucose levels, and blood pressure. He was advised to stop smoking and provided counseling support and smoking cessation medications. He attended structured diabetes classes and received individualized instruction from a diabetes educator and a dietitian. Metformin therapy was reinitiated and his insulin doses were reduced. The patient was then given the GLP­1 receptor agonist, exenatide. The patient lost about 8 kg in weight over the next 3 years and was able to stop his insulin. He had excellent control with an HbA1c of 6.5 % on a combination of metformin, exenatide, and glimepiride. The patient, however, regained some of the weight and his HbA1c increased. The glimepiride dose was reduced and SGLT2 inhibitor therapy instituted because of the diabetic nephropathy. His antihypertensive therapy was optimized and his urine albumin excretion declined to 1569 mg/g creatinine. This case illustrates the importance of weight loss in achieving target glucose levels in the obese patient with type 2 diabetes. It also shows that simply increasing the insulin dose is not always effective. Combining metformin with other oral agents and non­insulin injectables may be a better option.