through a significant portion of the intestinal tract before being cleaved by the intestinal bacteria to two equivalents of mesalamine. As illustrated by olsalazine, any compound passing through the gastrointestinal tract will encounter a large num- ber and variety of digestive and bacterial enzymes, which, in theory, can degrade the drug molecule. In practice, a new drug entity under investigation will likely be dropped from further consideration if it cannot survive in the intestinal tract or its oral bioavailability is low, necessitating par- enteral dosage forms only. An exception would be a drug for which there is no effective alternative or which is more ef- fective than existing products and can be administered by an alternate route, including parenteral, buccal, or transdermal. In contrast, these same digestive enzymes can be used to advantage. Chloramphenicol is water soluble enough (2.5 mg/mL) to come in contact with the taste receptors on the tongue, producing an unpalatable bitterness. To mask this intense bitter taste, the palmitic acid moiety is added as an ester of chloramphenicol’s primary alcohol. This reduces the parent drug’s water solubility (1.05 mg/mL), enough so that it can be formulated as a suspension that passes over the bitter taste receptors on the tongue. Once in the intestinal tract, the ester linkage is hydrolyzed by the digestive es- terases to the active antibiotic chloramphenicol and the very common dietary fatty acid palmitic acid. Olsalazine and chloramphenicol palmitate are examples of prodrugs. Most prodrugs are compounds that are inactive in their native form but are easily metabolized to the active agent. Olsalazine and chloramphenicol palmitate are exam- ples of prodrugs that are cleaved to smaller compounds, one of which is the active drug. Others are metabolic precursors to the active form. An example of this type of prodrug is menadione, a simple naphthoquinone that is converted in the liver to phytonadione (vitamin K2(20)). 4 Wilson and Gisvold’s Textbook of Organic Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry Figure 2.1 Summary of drug distribution.