GeNeRAL meThoDs AssociATeD WiTh The PhyTochemicAL iNVesTiGATioN oF heRBAL PRoDUcTs 139 17 The quantity of substance present determines the size of the spot with any one solvent and can be made the basis of quantitative evaluation. Also, the separated components of the original mixture can be sepa- rately eluted from the chromatogram, by treating the cut-out spots with a suitable solvent, and then determined quantitatively by some suitable method—for example, fluorescence analysis, colorimetry or ultraviolet adsorption. Drugs so evaluated include aloes, digitalis, ergot, hemlock, lobelia, nux vomica, opium, rauwolfia, rhubarb, broom, solanaceous herbs and volatile oils. high-performance liquid chromatography (hplc)/ high-speed lc HPLC is a liquid column chromatography system which employs relatively narrow columns (about 5 mm diameter for analytical work) operating at ambient temperature or up to about 200°C at pressures up to 200 atm (20 000 kPa). The columns are costly and it is usual to employ a small precol- umn containing a cartridge of packing material to remove adventitious ma terials which might otherwise damage the main column. Normal flow rates of eluate are 2–5 ml min−1 but can be up to 10 ml min−1, depending on the diameter of the column and the applied pressure. The apparatus is suitable for all types of liquid chromatography columns (adsorption, partition by the use of bonded liquid phases, reversed phase, gel fil- tration, ion exchange and affinity). The arrangement of such an appa- ratus, suitable for use with two solvents and giving graded elution, is illustrated in Fig. 17.1. Detection of the often very small quantities of solute in the eluate is possible by continuous monitoring of ultraviolet absorption, mass spectrum, refractive index, fluorescence and electrical conductance; nuclear magnetic resonance can now be added to this list. To improve detection, solutes may be either derivatized before chro- matography (this technique can also be used to improve separations) or treated with reagents after separation (post-column derivatization). A transport system for monitoring is commercially available; in this a moving wire passes through the flowing eluate (coating block) and the dissolved solute, deposited on the wire, is pyrolysed and its quantity automatically recorded. It will be noted that, for any particular fraction- ation, some detector systems would be selective for certain groups of compounds and others would be universal. HPLC can give much improved and more rapid separations than can be obtained with the older liquid chromatography methods and it is therefore finding increasing use in numerous areas. As with GLC apparatus, it is available from many manufacturers and can be completely automated. Many stationary phases are available, the most widely used being silica based. In these, which consist of porous particles 5–10 μm in diameter, the silanol groups (Si-OH) afford a polar surface which can be exploited in separations using an organic mobile phase as in ordinary adsorption chromatography. Reversed-phase packing material (Spherisorb ODS) is produced by the bonding of octadecylsilyl groups (C18H37Si–) to silica gel. In the commercial material there appears to be a considerable proportion of residual silanol–OH groups, so that adsorption and partition effects may operate during separation. The hydrocarbon chains probably allow non-polar interaction to take place. The structure of the packing material might be represented as: To reduce tailing effects which might be caused by the remaining free hydroxyl groups the latter can be masked by treatment with a short-chain silane, usually trimethylchlorosilane. Silica-based columns are restricted to use in the range pH 3–8 and to overcome this polymer phases operating at pH 1–13 are available; these, however, have the disadvantage of exhibiting a high column back-pressure. Of relatively recent introduction are chiral stationary phases which are utilized to separate the enantiomers of racemic mixtures. These have great potential for the study of natural products, many of which are opti- cally active, and for isolating the pharmacologically active enantiomer from the racemic mixture of a synthetic drug. Pharmacognostical examples include, among many others, the assay of partially racemized hyoscine extracted from plants, the separation of aromatics and the res- olution of mixtures of (+)- and (−)-epicatechin and other proanthocya- nidin enantiomers of Cassia fistula and C. javanica. The mode of action of chiral stationary phases is not fully understood; typical materials are cyclodextrins, cellulose- and amino acid-derivatives suitably bonded. Two products are sorbents made of spherical silica gel particles to which β-cyclodextrin (ChiraDex®) or γ-cyclodextrin (Chira-Dex® GAMMA) are covalently bonded via a carbamate bond and long spacer. For a review on the rapid detection and subsequent isolation of bio- active constituents of crude plant extracts with schemes for LC/UV, LC/MS, LC/MS/MS and LC/NMR see K. Hostettman et al., Planta Medica, 1997, 63, 2. supercritical fluid chromatography This technique, developed over recent years for both the qualitative and quantitative analysis of medicinal products, utilizes supercritical Solvent A Solvent B Pumps Valves Injection device Precolumn Column Pressure gauge Temperature– controlled oven Fraction collector Reagents Detector Recorder fig. 17.1 schematic representation of apparatus for high- performanance liquid chromatography utilizing two solvents. O Si O O Si HO OH C18H37 C18H37 OH OH Si Si O O O Si Si O