Carvedilol, like labetalol, is administered as a racemic mixture. The S(­) isomer is a nonselective β­adrenoceptor blocker, but both S(­) and R(+) isomers have approximately equal α­blocking potency. The isomers are stereoselectively metabolized in the liver, which means that their elimination half­lives may differ. The average half­life is 7–10 hours. The usual starting dosage of carvedilol for ordinary hypertension is 6.25 mg twice daily. Carvedilol reduces mortality in patients with heart failure and is therefore particularly useful in patients with both heart failure and hypertension. Nebivolol is a β1­selective blocker with vasodilating properties that are not mediated by α blockade. D­Nebivolol has highly selective β1­blocking effects, while the L­isomer causes vasodilation; the drug is marketed as a racemic mixture. The vasodilating effect may be due to an increase in endothelial release of nitric oxide via induction of endothelial nitric oxide synthase. The hemodynamic effects of nebivolol therefore differ from those of pure β blockers in that peripheral vascular resistance is acutely lowered (by nebivolol) as opposed to increased acutely (by the older agents). Nebivolol is extensively metabolized and has active metabolites. The half­life is 10–12 hours, but the drug can be given once daily. Dosing is generally started at 5 mg/d, with dose escalation as high as 40 mg/d, if necessary. The efficacy of nebivolol is similar to that of other antihypertensive agents, but several studies report fewer adverse effects. Esmolol Esmolol is a β1­selective blocker that is rapidly metabolized via hydrolysis by red blood cell esterases. It has a short half­life (9–10 minutes) and is administered by intravenous infusion. Esmolol is generally administered as a loading dose (0.5–1 mg/kg), followed by a constant infusion. The infusion is typically started at 50–150 mcg/kg/min, and the dose increased every 5 minutes, up to 300 mcg/kg/min, as needed to achieve the desired therapeutic effect. Esmolol is used for management of intraoperative and postoperative hypertension, and sometimes for hypertensive emergencies, particularly when hypertension is associated with tachycardia or when there is concern about toxicity such as aggravation of severe heart failure, in which case a drug with a short duration of action that can be discontinued quickly is advantageous. PRAZOSIN & OTHER ALPHA1 BLOCKERS Mechanism & Sites of Action Prazosin, terazosin, and doxazosin produce most of their antihypertensive effects by selectively blocking α1 receptors in arterioles and venules. These agents produce less reflex tachycardia when lowering blood pressure than do nonselective α antagonists such as phentolamine. Alpha1­ receptor selectivity allows norepinephrine to exert unopposed negative feedback (mediated by presynaptic α2 receptors) on its own release (see Chapter 6); in contrast, phentolamine blocks both presynaptic and postsynaptic α receptors, with the result that reflex activation of sympathetic neurons by phentolamine’s effects produces greater release of transmitter onto β receptors and correspondingly greater cardioacceleration. Alpha blockers reduce arterial pressure by dilating both resistance and capacitance vessels. As expected, blood pressure is reduced more in the upright than in the supine position. Retention of salt and water occurs when these drugs are administered without a diuretic. The drugs are more effective when used in combination with other agents, such as a β blocker and a diuretic, than when used alone. Owing to their beneficial effects in men with prostatic hyperplasia and bladder obstruction symptoms, these drugs are used primarily in men with concurrent hypertension and benign prostatic hyperplasia. Pharmacokinetics & Dosage Pharmacokinetic characteristics of prazosin are listed in Table 11–2. Terazosin is also extensively metabolized but undergoes very little first­pass metabolism and has a half­life of 12 hours. Doxazosin has an intermediate bioavailability and a half­life of 22 hours. Terazosin can often be given once daily, with doses of 5–20 mg/d. Doxazosin is usually given once daily starting at 1 mg/d and progressing to 4 mg/d or more as needed. Although long­term treatment with these α blockers causes relatively little postural hypotension, a precipitous drop in standing blood pressure develops in some patients shortly after the first dose is absorbed. For this reason, the first dose should be small and should be administered at bedtime. Although the mechanism of this first­dose phenomenon is not clear, it occurs more commonly in patients who are salt­ and volume­ depleted. Aside from the first­dose phenomenon, the reported toxicities of the α1 blockers are relatively infrequent and mild. These include dizziness, palpitations headache and lassitude Some patients develop a positive test for antinuclear factor in serum while on prazosin therapy but this has not