The short­acting preparations include regular human insulin and the three rapid­acting insulin analogs (Tables 41–5, 41–6). All are clear solutions at neutral pH. The insulin molecules exist as dimers that assemble into hexamers in the presence of two zinc ions. The hexamers are further stabilized by phenolic compounds such as phenol and meta­Cresol. The mutations engineered into the rapidly acting insulin analogs are designed to disrupt the stabilizing intermolecular interactions of the dimers and hexamers, leading to more rapid absorption into the circulation after subcutaneous injection. 1. Regular insulin Regular insulin is a short­acting, soluble crystalline zinc insulin whose hypoglycemic effect appears within 30 minutes after subcutaneous injection, peaks at about 2 hours, and lasts for 5–7 hours when usual quantities (ie, 5–15 U) are administered. For very insulin­resistant subjects who would otherwise require large volumes of insulin solution, a U500 preparation of human regular insulin is available both in a vial and a disposable pen. A U500 insulin syringe should be used to measure the dose when using the vial. If a U100 insulin syringe or tuberculin syringe is used, then the clinician should carefully note the dose in both units and volume to avoid overdosage. The disposable pen avoids this conversion issue and dispenses the regular U500 insulin in 5­unit increments. U­500 regular insulin, a concentrated insulin, has a different time action profile than U­100 regular insulin; it is similar to NPH insulin. When intravenous insulin is needed (eg, inpatient setting), regular insulin is used; it is particularly useful in the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis and during perioperative glucose management. 2. Rapidly acting insulin analogs Insulin lispro (Humalog) is an insulin analog in which the proline at position B28 is reversed with the lysine at B29. Insulin aspart (Novolog, Admelog, FiAsp) is a single substitution of proline by aspartic acid at position B28. Insulin glulisine (Apidra) differs from human insulin in that the amino acid asparagine at position B3 is replaced by lysine and the lysine in position B29 by glutamic acid. When injected subcutaneously, these three analogs quickly dissociate into monomers and are absorbed very rapidly, reaching peak serum values in as little as 1 hour. The amino acid changes in these analogs do not interfere with their binding to the insulin receptor, with the circulating half­life, or with their immunogenicity, which are all identical to those of human regular insulin. An insulin aspart formulation (FiAsp) that contains niacinamide (Vitamin B3) has a more rapid absorption and its onset of action is about 10 minutes faster than the standard insulin aspart formulation. Similarly, there is an insulin lispro formulation (Lyumjev) whose onset of action is 11 minutes faster than the insulin lispro formulation. This formulation contains citrate and treprostinil. The former increases vascular permeability and the latter induces vasodilatation, thus increasing the subcutaneous absorption speed. Clinical trials have demonstrated that the optimal times of preprandial rapidly acting insulin analogs and regular human insulin are 15 minutes and 45 minutes before the meal, respectively. The rapidly acting insulins are more convenient as patients can inject immediately before eating and do not have to wait as with regular insulin. It is important that patients ingest adequate carbohydrate early in the meal to avoid hypoglycemia during the meal. These analogs also have lowest variability of absorption: approximately 5% variation, compared to 25% for regular insulin. Another desirable feature of rapidly acting insulin analogs is that their duration of action is consistently about 4 hours for most commonly used dosages. This contrasts with regular insulin, whose duration of action is significantly prolonged when larger doses are used. The rapidly acting analogs are the insulin of choice for insulin pumps. In a double­blind crossover study comparing insulin lispro with regular insulin in insulin pumps, patients using insulin lispro had lower HbA1c values and improved postprandial glucose control with the same frequency of hypoglycemia. B . Long­Acting Insulin Preparations 1. NPH (neutral protamine Hagedorn, or isophane) insulin NPH insulin is an intermediate­acting insulin whose absorption and onset of action are delayed by combining appropriate amounts of insulin and protamine so that neither is present in an uncomplexed form (“isophane”) (Tables 41–5, 41–6). After subcutaneous injection, proteolytic tissue enzymes degrade the protamine to permit absorption of insulin. NPH insulin has an onset of approximately 2–4 hours, peak action 6­7 hours and duration of 10–20 hours (Figure 41–5); it is usually mixed with regular, lispro, aspart, or glulisine insulin and given two to four times daily for insulin replacement. The dose regulates the action profile; specifically, small doses have lower, earlier peaks and a short duration of action with the converse true for large doses.