because the ability to respond to a chemotherapeutic agent is partly dependent on the genetic abnormality occurring in the cell. The primary risk factor for most cancers is age. There are certainly other risk factors such as exposure to environmental toxins, but generally, as aging occurs, the chance of develop- ing cancer increases. This is related to the genetic component of cancer so that every time a cell divides, there is a small chance that an aberrant cancer cell may arise as a result of mutation or translocation of DNA. This is cumulative so that the chances increase with an increasing number of cell divi- sions and, hence, age. Normal cellular growth and proliferation are generally driven by factors external to the cell. Mitogenic signals such as hormones and growth factors direct the cell to un- dergo mitosis and are generally released from other tissues setting up a system of checks and balances where any one cell type is not allowed to proliferate in an uncontrolled manner. In cancer cells, this system may become disrupted in several ways. For example, some cells may acquire the ability to synthesize their own growth factors in a process known as autocrine signaling. It is also possible for cells to lose the requirements for growth factors altogether and still be capable of proliferating. There are numerous ways in which this may come about. For example, the signal trans- duction processes in which the interaction of a growth fac- tor and its receptor is translated into cellular division may become permanently activated at any one point along the chain or at multiple points. Central to this idea is the con- cept of oncogenes or cancer-producing genes, the products of which may be responsible for these types of alterations. Oncogenes themselves are not normally present in the genome; however, precursors known as proto-oncogenes are commonly seen. Alterations in these proto-oncogenes by mutation or translocation may result in their transfor- mation to an oncogene and the development of cancer. Several of these are listed in Table 10.1, but it should be kept in mind that although conversion of any particular proto-oncogene to an oncogene may be associated with a particular cancer, it is not seen in all patients that develop this type of cancer. The process of cell division occurs through a series of phases that collectively are known as the cell cycle. Starting in the G1 for gap 1 or growth 1 phase, the enzymes neces- sary for the replication of DNA are synthesized (Fig. 10.1). Alternatively, cells may enter the G0 phase in which they do not prepare for cell division but carry on normal meta- bolic processes. Entry into G0 (sometimes referred to as senescence) is not an irreversible process; however, some cells such as nerve cells never divide. If the cell is to un- dergo division, it will progress to the S phase where DNA is replicated. This is followed by the G2 phase, during which additional protein synthesis occurs including the formation of the microtubules. The M phase, which is fur- ther subdivided into prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase, follows in which the DNA is segregated and cell division occurs. During the entire cycle, movement from one phase to the next is driven by proteins known as cyclins and their associated cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). There are several subtypes of cyclins with their CDKs, the concentrations of which change or cycle as the cell moves from G1 through M phase, and this concentra- tion change is associated with moving the cell into the next phase. The D-type cyclins paired with CDK4/6 are in high concentration during the G1 phase, and their formation is under the control of external growth factors. Subsequent to this, the D-type cyclins help drive the formation of cyclin E with its CDK2, which drives the cell from the G1 to the S phase. This is followed by formation of A- and B-type cyclins with their CDKs, which push the cell into G2 and subsequently into M, respectively. The progression through the cell cycle is a highly regu- lated process, and the cell is constantly monitoring itself to make sure that the necessary enzymes are present and the genome is intact. If problems are encountered, the cell may be slowed from progressing or undergo programmed cell death also known as apoptosis. Regulation of the cell through the cell cycle is the function of the tumor suppres- sor proteins such as retinoblastoma protein (Rb), p21Cip1, and p53.2 Especially important in this regard is p53, some- times referred to as the guardian of the cell, it functions as a transcription factor and may activate genes, the products of which are involved in the repair of DNA. When damage be- comes too severe to be repaired, p53 may direct the cell to die. One of the best examples of this is seen during over- exposure to the sun. The UV damage that the skin has suf- fered is detected by p53 and the cells undergo apoptosis with the resulting peeling away of the dead skin.3 Activation of p53 may occur in response to various stresses that cause damage to the genome, but it has been found that in many cancer cells, p53 and other tumor suppressor genes are not 356 Wilson and Gisvold’s Textbook of Organic Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry TABLE 10.1 Selected Oncogenes and the Associated Human Cancer Associated Human Oncogene Oncogene Product Cancer ETS Transcription factor Leukemia RAS G-protein Ovarian, bladder, lung RAF Serine-threonine kinase Bladder KIT Receptor tyrosine kinase Colon SIS Growth factor Various TP53 Transcription factor (p53) Various Figure 10.1 Cyclins and the cell cycle.