ChApTER 44 Micronutrients: Vitamins & Minerals 551 CH3 H3C CH3 CH3 CH2OH CH3 CH3 H3C CH3 CH3 CH3 CH3 H3C CH3 CH3 COOH CH3 CH3 H3C H3C CH3 COOH CH3 CH3 H3C CH3 CH3 CHO CH3 Retinol Retinaldehyde All-trans-retinoic acid 9-cis-retinoic acid CH3 CH3 CH3 H3C H3C β-Carotene FIGURE 44–1 a-Carotene and the major vitamin A vitamers. Asterisk shows the site of symmetrical cleavage of β-carotene by carotene dioxygenase, to yield retinaldehyde. CH3 H3C CH2OH H2N C=O NH NH C=O CH3 CH3 CH3 C=N CH3 CH3 H3C CH3 CH3 CH3 H3C CH2OH CH3 CH3 H3C CH3 H3C HC=O CH3 CH3 H3C CH3 H3C HC=N CH3 CH3 H3C All-trans-retinol CH3 H3C CH3 CH3 CH3 All-trans-retinaldehyde + opsin Photorhodopsin GDP GTP Conformational changes in protein 11-cis-Retinol 11-cis-Retinaldehyde Rhodopsin (visual purple) Lysine residue in opsin LIGHT 10 –15sec 45 psec Na channel closed Inactive Na+ channel open Active phosphodiesterase Bathorhodopsin 30 nsec Lumirhodopsin 75 µsec Metarhodopsin I Transducin-GTP Transducin-GDP 10 msec Metarhodopsin II minutes Metarhodopsin III C=O C=O H NH Pi cGMP 5'GMP + FIGURE 44–2 The role of retinaldehyde in the visual cycle. acid. Retinoid X receptors also form dimers with vitamin D, thyroid, and other a nuclear acting hormone receptors. Deficiency of vitamin A impairs vitamin D and thyroid hor- mone function because of lack of 9-cis-retinoic acid to form active receptor dimers. Unoccupied retinoid X receptors form dimers with occupied vitamin D and thyroid hormone recep- tors, but not only do these not activate gene expression, they may repress it, so that vitamin A deficiency has a more severe effect on vitamin D and thyroid hormone function than sim- ply failure to activate gene expression. Excessive vitamin A also impairs vitamin D and thyroid hormone function, because of formation of RXR homodimers, meaning that there are not enough RXR available to form heterodimers with the vitamin D and thyroid hormone receptors. Vitamin A Deficiency Is a Major public health problem Worldwide Vitamin A deficiency is the most important preventable cause of blindness. The earliest sign of deficiency is a loss of sensi- tivity to green light, followed by impairment to adapt to dim light, then night blindness, an inability to see in the dark. More prolonged deficiency leads to xerophthalmia: kera- tinization of the cornea, and blindness. Vitamin A also has an important role in differentiation of immune system cells, and even mild deficiency leads to increased susceptibility to infectious diseases. The synthesis of retinol binding protein, which is required to transport the vitamin in the bloodstream, is reduced in response to infection (it is a negative acute phase protein), decreasing the circulating concentration of the vitamin, and further impairing immune responses. Vitamin A Is Toxic in Excess There is only a limited capacity to metabolize vitamin A, and excessive intakes lead to accumulation beyond the capacity of intracellular binding proteins; unbound vitamin A causes membrane lysis and tissue damage. Symptoms of toxicity affect the central nervous system (headache, nausea, ataxia, and anorexia, all associated with increased cerebrospinal fluid pressure); the liver (hepatomegaly with histological changes and hyperlipidemia); calcium homeostasis (thickening of the long bones, hypercalcemia, and calcification of soft tissues); and the skin (excessive dryness, desquamation, and alopecia). VITAMIN D IS REALLY A HORMONE Vitamin D is not strictly a vitamin since it can be synthesized in the skin, and under most conditions this is the major source of the vitamin. Only when sunlight exposure is inadequate is a Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library