142 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS for the submission of in vivo bioequivalence data based on an assessment that such bioequivalence may be con­ sidered self-evident as demonstrated by other data in the application or based on some of the following criteria (5): • The drug product contains the same active drug ingre­ dient, in the same concentration and dosage form as the comparator-approved product, and is intended to be administered by the same route. • The drug product contains no inactive ingredient or other change in formulation from the approved drug product that may significantly affect the systemic absorption or therapeutic effectiveness of the active ingredient/product. • The drug product is a parenteral, ophthalmic, nasal, oral, or otic solution; an inhalation; or a dermatologic preparation. • The drug product is not a delayed-release or extended­ release dosage form. • The drug product meets an approved in vitro test com­ parable to the in vitro test of the approved drug, which has been correlated with in vivo data. • The drug product is manufactured in accord with all Current Good Manufacturing Practice regulations. The FDA may require in vivo studies if the agency deter­ mines that some differences between the proposed drug product and the previously approved drug product may affect the bioavailability, bioequivalence, or therapeutic equivalence of the proposed product. The variables that can contribute to the differences between products are many (Table 5.3). For instance, in the manufacture of a tablet, different materials or amounts of such formulative components as fillers, disintegrating agents, binders, lubricants, colorants, flavorants, and coat­ ings may be used. The particle size or crystalline form of a therapeutic or pharmaceutical component may vary between formulations. The tablet may vary in shape, size, and hardness, depending on the punches, dies, and com­ pression forces used in the process. During packaging, ship­ ping, and storage, the integrity of the tablets may be altered by physical impact, by changes in humidity and tempera­ ture, or through interactions with the components of the container. Each of these factors may affect the rates of tablet disintegration, drug dissolution, and consequently the rate and extent of drug absorption. Although the bioequivalency problems are perhaps greater among tablets than for other dosage forms because of the multiplicity of variables, the same types of problems exist for the other dosage forms and must be considered in assessing bioequivalency. Sometimes even therapeutically equivalent drugs are not equally suitable for a particular patient. For example, a patient may be hypersensitive to an inert ingredient in one product (brand name or generic) that another prod­ uct does not contain. Or a patient may become confused or upset if dispensed an alternative product that differs in color, flavor, shape, or packaging from that to which he or she is accustomed. Switching between products can TABLE 5.3. Some Factors That Influence Bioavailability of Oral Drugs Drug Substance Physicochemical Properties Particle size Crystalline or amorphous form Salt form Hydration Lipid or water solubility pH and pK. Pharmaceutical Ingredients Fillers Binders Coatings Disintegrating agents Lubricants Suspending agents Surface active agents Flavoring agents Coloring agents Preservative agents Stabilizing agents Dosage Form Characteristics Disintegration rate {tablets) Dissolution time of drug in dosage form Product age and storage conditions Physiologic Factors and Patient Characteristics Gastric emptying time Intestinal transit time Gastrointestinal abnormality or pathologic condition Gastric contents Other drugs Food Fluids Gastrointestinal pH Drug Metabolism {Gut and During First Passage Through Liver) generate concern, and thus pharmacists need to be pru­ dent in both initial selection and interchange of products. I ROUTES OF DRUG ADMINISTRATION Drugs may be administered using a variety of dosage forms and routes of administration, as presented in Tables 5.4 and 5.5. One of the fundamental considerations in dosage form design is whether the drug is intended for local or systemic effects. Local effects are achieved by direct appli­ cation of the drug to the desired site of action, such as the eye, nose, or skin. Systemic effects result from the entrance of the drug into the circulatory system and transport to the cellular site of its action. For systemic effects, a drug