Mitiglinide (not available in the United States) is a benzylsuccinic acid derivative that binds to the sulfonylurea receptor and is similar to repaglinide in its clinical effects. It is available for use in Japan. D­PHENYLALANINE DERIVATIVE Nateglinide is a D­phenylalanine derivative and stimulates rapid and transient release of insulin from beta cells through closure of the ATP­sensitive K+ channel. It is absorbed within 20 minutes after oral administration with a time to peak concentration of less than 1 hour and is metabolized in the liver by CYP2C9 and CYP3A4 with a half­life of about 1 hour. The overall duration of action is about 4 hours. It is taken before the meal and reduces the postprandial rise in blood glucose levels. It is available as 60­ and 120­mg tablets. The lower dose is used in patients with mild elevations in HbA1c. Nateglinide is efficacious when given alone or in combination with non­secretagogue oral agents (such as metformin). Hypoglycemia is the main adverse effect. It can be used in patients with renal impairment and in the elderly. DRUGS THAT PRIMARILY LOWER GLUCOSE LEVELS BY THEIR ACTIONS ON THE LIVER, MUSCLE, & ADIPOSE TISSUE BIGUANIDES The structure of metformin is shown below. Metformin’s therapeutic effects primarily derive from increasing hepatic adenosine monophosphate–activated protein kinase activity, which reduces hepatic gluconeogenesis and lipogenesis. Metformin is a substrate for organic cation transporter 1, which is abundantly expressed in hepatocytes and in the gut. Metformin has a half­life of 1.5–3 hours, is not bound to plasma proteins, is not metabolized, and is excreted by the kidneys as the active compound. As a consequence of metformin’s blockade of gluconeogenesis, the drug may impair the hepatic metabolism of lactic acid. In patients with renal insufficiency, the biguanide accumulates and thereby increases the risk of lactic acidosis, which appears to be a dose­related complication. Metformin can be safely used in patients with estimated glomerular filtration rates (eGFR) between 60 and 45 mL/min per 1.73 m2. It can be used cautiously in patients with stable eGFR between 45 and 30 mL/min per 1.73 m2. It is contraindicated if the eGFR is less than 30 mL/min per 1.73 m2. Patients with decompensated liver failure should do not take metformin because of the increased risk of lactic acidosis. The current recommendation is to start metformin at diagnosis of type 2 diabetes. The United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study reported that in the obese patients with type 2 diabetes, metformin decreased the risk for cardiovascular disease as well as microvascular disease. Metformin is also used in combination with non­insulin agents (oral and injectable) and insulin in patients with type 2 diabetes in whom monotherapy is inadequate. Metformin is useful in the prevention of type 2 diabetes; the landmark Diabetes Prevention Program concluded that metformin is efficacious in preventing the new onset of type 2 diabetes in middle­aged, obese persons with impaired glucose tolerance and fasting hyperglycemia. Epidemiologic studies suggest that metformin use may reduce the risk of some cancers. Although the recommended maximal dosage is 2550 mg daily, little benefit is seen above a total dosage of 2000 mg daily. Treatment is typically initiated at 500 mg daily with a meal and increased gradually in divided doses. Common dosing schedules are 500 mg once or twice daily increased to 1000 mg twice daily. The maximal dosage is 850 mg three times a day. The most common adverse effects of metformin are gastrointestinal (anorexia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal discomfort, and diarrhea), occurring in up to 20% of patients. They are dose­related, tend to occur at the onset of therapy, and are often transient. Taking metformin with food or use of an extended­release formulation can ameliorate the symptoms. However, in 3–5% of patients, therapy may have to be discontinued because of persistent diarrhea. Metformin interferes with the calcium­dependent absorption of vitamin B12­intrinsic factor complex in the terminal ileum, and vitamin B12 deficiency