Carbohydrate metabolism 184 Diabetes mellitus Diabetes mellitus is caused by an absolute or relative insulin deficiency. It has been defined by the World Health Organization (WHO), on the basis of laboratory findings, as a fasting venous plasma glucose concentration of 7.0 mmol/L or more (on more than one occasion or once in the presence of diabetes symptoms) or a random venous plasma glucose concentration of 11.1 mmol/L or more. Sometimes an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) may be required to establish the diagnosis in equivocal cases. The interpretation of this test is shown below, but, briefly, diabetes mellitus can be diagnosed if the venous plasma glucose concentration is 7.0 mmol/L or more (fasting) and/or 11.1 mmol/L or more 2 h after the oral ingestion of the equivalent of 75 g of anhydrous glucose. Diabetes mellitus can be classified into the following categories. Type 1 diabetes mellitus Previously called insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, this is the term used to describe the condition in patients for whom insulin therapy is essential because they are prone to develop ketoacidosis. It usually presents during childhood or adolescence. Most of these cases are due to immune-mediated processes and may be associated with other autoimmune disorders such as Addison’s disease, vitiligo and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. It has been suggested that many cases follow a viral infection that has damaged the b-cells of the pancreatic islets. Individuals most at risk are those with human leucocyte antigen (HLA) types DR3 and DR4 of the major histocompatibility complex. Autoantibodies to islet cells, insulin, tyrosine phosphatases IA-2 and IA-2b and glutamic decarboxylase (GAD) are found in about 90 per cent of cases. There is a form of type 1 diabetes called idiopathic diabetes mellitus that is not autoimmune mediated but is strongly inherited and more common in black and Asian people. The insulin requirement of affected people can fluctuate widely and the cause is unknown. There is also LADA (latent autoimmune diabetes of adults), sometimes called slow-onset type 1 diabetes. Type 2 diabetes mellitus Previously called non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, this is the most common variety worldwide (about 90 per cent of all diabetes mellitus cases). Patients are much less likely to develop ketoacidosis than those with type 1 diabetes, although insulin may sometimes be needed. Onset is most usual during adult life; there is a familial tendency and an association with obesity. There is a spectrum of disorders ranging from mainly insulin resistance with relative insulin deficiency to a predominantly secretory defect with insulin resistance. Other specific types of diabetes mellitus A variety of inherited disorders may be responsible for the syndrome, either by reducing insulin secretion or by causing relative insulin deficiency because of resistance to its action or of insulin receptor defects, despite high plasma insulin concentrations. Genetic defects of b-cell function ● Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY): – MODY 1: mutation of the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF4A) gene, – MODY 2: mutation of the glucokinase gene, – MODY 3: mutation of the HNF1A gene. Some cases are thought to be point mutations in mitochondrial deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) associated with diabetes mellitus and deafness and are usually autosomal dominant. Genetic defects of insulin action ● Type A insulin resistance (insulin receptor defect), for example leprechaunism, lipoatrophy and Rabson–Mendenhall syndrome. Insulin deficiency due to pancreatic disease ● Chronic pancreatitis. ● Pancreatectomy. ● Haemochromatosis. ● Cystic fibrosis. Endocrinopathies ● Relative insulin deficiency, due to excessive GH (acromegaly), phaeochromocytoma, glucocorticoid secretion (Cushing’s syndrome). Drugs ● Thiazide diuretics. ● Interferon-a. ● Glucocorticoids. Infections ● Septicaemia. ● Congenital rubella. ● Cytomegalovirus. Rare forms of autoimmune-mediated diabetes ● Anti-insulin receptor antibodies. ● Stiff man syndrome, with high levels of GAD autoantibodies.