CLONIDINE Blood pressure lowering by clonidine results from reduction of cardiac output due to decreased heart rate and relaxation of capacitance vessels, as well as a reduction in peripheral vascular resistance. Reduction in arterial blood pressure by clonidine is accompanied by decreased renal vascular resistance and maintenance of renal blood flow. As with methyldopa, clonidine reduces blood pressure in the supine position and only rarely causes postural hypotension. Pressor effects of clonidine are not observed after ingestion of therapeutic doses of clonidine, but severe hypertension can complicate a massive overdose. Pharmacokinetics & Dosage Typical pharmacokinetic characteristics are listed in Table 11–2. Clonidine is lipid­soluble and rapidly enters the brain from the circulation. Because of its relatively short half­life and the fact that its antihypertensive effect is directly related to blood concentration, oral clonidine must be given twice a day (or as a patch, below) to maintain smooth blood pressure control. However, as is not the case with methyldopa, the dose­response curve of clonidine is such that increasing doses are more effective (but also more toxic). A transdermal preparation of clonidine that reduces blood pressure for 7 days after a single application is also available. This preparation appears to produce less sedation than clonidine tablets but may be associated with local skin reactions. Toxicity Dry mouth and sedation are common. Both effects are centrally mediated and dose­dependent and coincide temporally with the drug’s antihypertensive effect. Clonidine should not be given to patients who are at risk for mental depression and should be withdrawn if depression occurs during therapy. Concomitant treatment with tricyclic antidepressants may block the antihypertensive effect of clonidine. The interaction is believed to be due to α­ adrenoceptor–blocking actions of the tricyclics. Withdrawal of clonidine after protracted use, particularly with high dosages (more than 1 mg/d), can result in life­threatening hypertensive crisis mediated by increased sympathetic nervous activity. Patients exhibit nervousness, tachycardia, headache, and sweating after omitting one or two doses of the drug. Because of the risk of severe hypertensive crisis when clonidine is suddenly withdrawn, all patients who take clonidine should be warned of this possibility. If the drug must be stopped, it should be done gradually while other antihypertensive agents are being substituted. Treatment of the hypertensive crisis consists of reinstitution of clonidine therapy or administration of α­ and β­adrenoceptor–blocking agents. GANGLION­BLOCKING AGENTS Historically, drugs that block activation of postganglionic autonomic neurons by acetylcholine were among the first agents used in the treatment of hypertension. Most such drugs are no longer available clinically because of intolerable toxicities related to their primary action (see below). Ganglion blockers competitively block nicotinic cholinoceptors on postganglionic neurons in both sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia. In addition, these drugs may directly block the nicotinic acetylcholine channel, in the same fashion as neuromuscular nicotinic blockers. The adverse effects of ganglion blockers are direct extensions of their pharmacologic effects. These effects include both sympathoplegia (excessive orthostatic hypotension and sexual dysfunction) and parasympathoplegia (constipation, urinary retention, precipitation of glaucoma, blurred vision, dry mouth, etc). These severe toxicities are the major reason for the abandonment of ganglion blockers for the therapy of hypertension.