vessels is usually indicated and can save a limb that would otherwise require amputation. Supervised exercise therapy is of benefit in reducing claudication and increasing pain­free walking distance. Medical treatment directed at reversal or control of atherosclerosis requires measurement and control of hyperlipidemia (see Chapter 35), hypertension (see Chapter 11), and obesity; cessation of smoking; and control of diabetes, if present. Physical therapy and exercise training are of proven benefit. Conventional vasodilators are of no benefit because vessels distal to the obstructive lesions are usually already dilated at rest. Antiplatelet drugs such as aspirin or clopidogrel (see Chapter 34) are often used to prevent clotting in the region of plaques and have documented benefit in reducing the risk of myocardial infarction, stroke, and vascular death even though they have little or no effect on claudication. Two drugs are used almost exclusively for PAD. Cilostazol, a phosphodiesterase type 3 (PDE3) inhibitor, may have selective antiplatelet and vasodilating effects. This drug has been shown to increase exercise tolerance in patients with severe claudication and is approved for use in PAD. Naftidrofuryl, a 5­HT2 antagonist, is available in the UK and appears to have benefits similar to those of cilostazol. Pentoxifylline, a xanthine derivative, is widely promoted for use in this condition but is not recommended. It is thought to act by reducing the viscosity of blood and perhaps increasing the deformability of red blood cells, allowing blood to flow more easily through partially obstructed areas. As noted above, percutaneous angioplasty with stenting may be effective in patients with medically intractable signs and symptoms of lower limb ischemia. SUMMARY Drugs Used In Angina Pectoris Subclass, Drug Mechanism of Action Effects Clinical Applications Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, Interactions NITRATES • Nitroglycerin Releases nitric oxide in smooth muscle, which activates guanylyl cyclase and increases cGMP Smooth muscle relaxation, especially in vessels • other smooth muscle is relaxed but not as markedly • vasodilation decreases venous return and heart size • may increase coronary flow in some areas and in variant angina Angina: Sublingual form for acute episodes • oral and transdermal forms for prophylaxis • IV form for acute coronary syndrome High first­pass effect, so sublingual dose is much smaller than oral • high lipid solubility ensures rapid absorption • Toxicity: Orthostatic hypotension, tachycardia, headache • Interactions: Synergistic hypotension with phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (sildenafil, etc) • Isosorbide dinitrate: Very similar to nitroglycerin, slightly longer duration of action; no transdermal form • Isosorbide mononitrate: Active metabolite of the dinitrate; used orally for prophylaxis BETA BLOCKERS • Propranolol Nonselective competitive antagonist at β adrenoceptors Decreased heart rate, cardiac output, and blood pressure • decreases myocardial oxygen demand Prophylaxis of angina • for other applications, see Chapters 10, 11, and 13 Oral and parenteral, 4–6 h duration of action • Toxicity: Asthma, atrioventricular block, acute heart failure, sedation • Interactions: Additive with all cardiac depressants • Atenolol, metoprolol, others: β1­selective blockers, less risk of bronchospasm, but still significant • See Chapters 10 and 11 for other β blockers and their applications CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS • Verapamil, diltiazem Nonselective block of L­type calcium Reduced vascular resistance, cardiac rate, and cardiac force results in decreased oxygen demand Prophylaxis of angina, hypertension, Oral, IV, duration 4–8 h • Toxicity: Atrioventricular block, acute heart failure; constipation, edema • Interactions: Additive