Hypoglycaemia 199 Ketonuria Most simple urine tests for ketones are more sensitive for detecting acetoacetate than acetone; b-hydroxybutyrate does not always react in these tests. Occasional colour reactions resembling, but not identical to, that of acetoacetate may be given by phthalein compounds when used as a laxative. Ketostix and Acetest are strips and tablets, respectively, impregnated with ammonium sulphate and sodium nitroprusside. Remember that raised concentrations of urinary ketones can occur not only in diabetic ketoacidosis but also in alcoholic ketoacidosis or starvation, and in some urinary tract infections. SUMMARY ● Diabetes mellitus is a common medical condition, and an understanding of its biochemistry aids its medical management. Type 1 diabetes mellitus is associated with insulin deﬁ ciency and may present with weight loss and urinary ketones in young individuals. There is a relationship with autoimmune disease. Treatment is with insulin. Conversely, type 2 diabetes mellitus is usually associated with insulin resistance, increased body weight and later age presentation. There may be a family history of diabetes mellitus. Treatment involves diet and biguanides, sulphonylureas, glitazones or incretins, although insulin may sometimes be needed. ● Biochemical tests have a major role in the management of diabetes mellitus and in monitoring its complications, such as in the control of blood glucose, HbA1c, plasma lipids and urinary ACR. ● Diabetes mellitus can present with various comas, including hypoglycaemia, diabetic ketoacidosis (type 1), HONK and lactic acidosis. ● Hypoglycaemia can present with neurological impairment and coma. A useful classiﬁ cation is to divide hypoglycaemia into that with high plasma insulin and that with low insulin levels. The causes of hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia include insulinomas and following insulin administration. The causes of hypoinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia include severe hepatic disease, adrenal insufﬁ ciency, pituitary failure and non-pancreatic tumours producing insulin-like substances.