914 SECTION 15 | Respiratory Disorders even during symptom-free periods. The adult zafirlukast dose is 20 mg twice daily, taken at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after meals; the dose for children ages 5–11 years is 10 mg twice daily. The adult montelukast dose is 10 mg once daily, taken in the evening without regard to food; the dose for children ages 6–14 years is one 5 mg chewable tablet daily in the evening. • Use of montelukast and zafirlukast has fallen out of favor due to increased obser- vance of unusual adverse effects and modest therapeutic efficacy. An idiosyncratic syndrome similar to the Churg–Strauss syndrome, with marked circulating eosino- philia, heart failure, and associated eosinophilic vasculitis, has been reported rarely. Because of reports of adverse neuropsychiatric events especially within a few weeks of starting therapy, monitor patients for signs of irritability, aggressiveness, and sleep disturbances; suicidality has also been reported rarely. There have been reports of fatal hepatic failure associated with zafirlukast. • Zileuton (Zyflo) is a 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor; its use is limited due to potential for elevated hepatic enzymes, especially in the first 3 months of therapy, and inhibition of metabolism of drugs metabolized by CYP3A4 (eg, theophylline, warfarin). The dose of zileuton tablets is 600 mg four times daily with meals and at bedtime. The dose of zileuton extended-release tablets is two 600 mg tablets twice daily, within 1 hour after the morning and evening meals (total daily dose 2400 mg). Biologic Agents • These agents target the IgE pathway (relevant to allergic asthma) or IL-4, IL-13, and IL-5 pathways (relevant to the Th2 pathway and eosinophilic disorders) and are indi- cated for patients with moderate or severe asthma (depending upon the drug) along with other biomarkers or clinical indicators associated with treatment response. They are typically reserved for patients with moderate to severe persistent asthma who have poor symptom control despite treatment with high- dose ICS- LABA with rel- evant allergic (or eosinophilic) biomarkers or need maintenance oral corticosteroids. • Omalizumab (Xolair) is an anti-IgE antibody approved for treatment of allergic asthma not well controlled by oral or ICS. Dosage is determined by baseline total serum IgE (international units/mL [kIU/L]) and body weight (kg). Doses range from 150 to 375 mg subcutaneously (SC) at either 2- or 4-week intervals. Omalizumab is recommended for treating patients >6 years of age with moderate-to-severe asthma not adequately controlled by ICS, ICS/LABA, and in some cases, oral corticosteroids. Elevated levels of the fraction of exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) at ≥24 ppb and eosino- phil levels >260 eosinophils/mcg/L while taking high-dose ICS are predictive of an exacerbation reduction response. Patients taking omalizumab reported local injec- tion site reactions (similar to all subcutaneous biologics) and rates of anaphylaxis at 0.1%, which resulted in a Boxed Warning. Treatment must be administered in a clinical setting to observe for anaphylaxis after each dose. • Mepolizumab (Nucala) and reslizumab (Cinqair) are monoclonal antibodies directed against IL-5 to block activation of the IL-5 receptor on eosinophils. Ben- ralizumab (Fasenra) binds to the alpha subunit of the IL-5 receptor of eosinophils and prevents binding of IL-5, thus mitigating downstream eosinophilic inflamma- tion. Mepolizumab and benralizumab are approved for patients ≥12 years old with severe asthma and are administered SC; reslizumab is approved for severe asthma in patients ≥18 years old and is administered IV. Mepolizumab and reslizumab are dosed every 4 weeks; benralizumab is dosed every 4 weeks for 3 months then every 8 weeks. Doses are to be administered in a healthcare setting by professionals who are prepared to manage anaphylaxis. Each of these drugs is indicated for patients with an “eosinophilic phenotype” (which has not been formally defined). However, a reduc- tion in exacerbation rate of ∼50% is observed when patients have a certain minimum peripheral blood eosinophil count that varies by drug. • Dupilumab (Dupixent) targets the IL-4α receptor, thus blocking signaling of IL4 and IL-13, which are cytokines that promote IgE synthesis and inflammatory cell recruitment. Dupilumab is approved for patients with moderate-to-severe asthma