can occur after many years of metformin use. Periodic screening for vitamin B12 deficiency should be considered, especially in patients with peripheral neuropathy or macrocytic anemia. Increased intake of calcium may prevent the metformin­induced B12 malabsorption. Lactic acidosis can rarely occur with metformin therapy. It is more likely to occur in conditions of tissue hypoxia when there is increased production of lactic acid and in renal failure when there is decreased clearance of metformin. Almost all reported cases have involved patients with associated risk factors that should have contraindicated its use (kidney, liver, or cardiorespiratory insufficiency; alcoholism). Acute kidney failure can occur rarely in certain patients receiving radiocontrast agents. Metformin therapy should therefore be temporarily held on the day of radiocontrast administration and restarted a day or two later after confirmation that renal function has not deteriorated. Renal function should be checked at least annually in patients on metformin therapy, and lower doses (eg, 500 mg twice a day) should be used in the elderly who may have limited renal reserve and in those with eGFR between 30 and 45 mL/min per 1.73 m2. THIAZOLIDINEDIONES The thiazolidinediones are ligands of peroxisome proliferator­activated receptor gamma (PPAR­γ), members of the steroid and thyroid superfamily of nuclear receptors. These PPAR receptors are found in muscle, fat, and liver. PPAR­γ receptors modulate the expression of the genes involved in lipid and glucose metabolism, insulin signal transduction, and adipocyte and other tissue differentiation. Observed effects of the thiazolidinediones include increased glucose transporter expression (GLUT 1 and GLUT 4), decreased free fatty acid levels, decreased hepatic glucose output, increased adiponectin and decreased release of resistin from adipocytes, and increased differentiation of preadipocytes to adipocytes. Thiazolidinediones have also been shown to decrease levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1, matrix metalloproteinase 9, C­reactive protein, and interleukin 6. Two thiazolidinediones are currently available: pioglitazone and rosiglitazone. Rosiglitazone is no longer available in the United States and Europe Their clinical effect is to lower insulin requirements (improve insulin sensitivity) Pioglitazone has some PPAR­α as well as PPAR­γ activity. It is absorbed within 2 hours of ingestion; although food may delay uptake, total bioavailability is not affected. Absorption is decreased with concomitant use of bile acid sequestrants. Pioglitazone is metabolized by CYP2C8 and CYP3A4 to active metabolites. The bioavailability of numerous other drugs also degraded by these enzymes may be affected by pioglitazone therapy, including estrogen­containing oral contraceptives; additional methods of contraception are advised. Pioglitazone may be taken once daily; the usual starting dosage is 15–30 mg/d, and the maximum is 45 mg/d. Rosiglitazone is rapidly absorbed and highly protein bound. It is metabolized in the liver to minimally active metabolites, predominantly by CYP2C8 and to a lesser extent by CYP2C9. It is administered once or twice daily; 2–8 mg is the usual total dosage. Both pioglitazone and rosiglitazone are effective as monontherapy and combination therapy. These drugs also have some additional effects apart from glucose lowering. Pioglitazone lowers triglycerides and increases high­density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol without affecting total cholesterol and low­density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol. Rosiglitazone increases total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and LDL cholesterol but does not have significant effect on triglycerides. These drugs have been shown to improve the biochemical and histologic features of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. They seem to have a positive effect on endothelial function: pioglitazone reduces neointimal proliferation after coronary stent placement, and rosiglitazone has been shown to reduce microalbuminuria. In nondiabetic insulin­resistant patients who had a recent history of ischemic stroke or transient ischemic attack, pioglitazone therapy reduced the risk of subsequent stroke or myocardial infarction. Safety concerns and troublesome side effects have significantly reduced the use of this class of drugs. A meta­analysis of randomized clinical trials with rosiglitazone suggested an increased risk of angina pectoris or myocardial infarction. As a result, rosiglitazone was suspended in Europe and severely restricted in the United States. A subsequent large prospective clinical trial (the RECORD study) failed to confirm the meta­analysis findings. While the US lifted restrictions, rosiglitazone (Avandia) has been discontinued by the manufacturer. The drug remains unavailable in Europe and several other countries. Fluid retention occurs in about 3–4% of patients on thiazolidinedione monotherapy and occurs more frequently (10–15%) in patients on concomitant insulin therapy. Heart failure can occur, and the drugs are contraindicated in patients with New York Heart Association class III and IV cardiac status (see Chapter 13). Macular edema is a rare adverse effect that improves when the drug is discontinued. Loss of bone mineral density and increased atypical extremity bone fractures in women are described for both drugs; this is postulated to be due to decreased osteoblast formation. Other d ff t i l d i hi h i ht b d t dil ti l ff t f i d l l th th d ti i d bl d ll