Individual Agents MECHLORETHAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE (NH2, MUSTARGEN) Mechlorethamine is available in 10-mg vials for intra- venous (IV) administration in the treatment of Hodgkin’s lymphoma. It is part of the MOPP regimen used in treating this condition, which is comprised of mechlorethamine, vincristine (Oncovin), procarbazine, and prednisone. The agent is also used topically in the treatment of mycosis fun- goides, a rare type of cancer but the most common type of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Additional uses have included treatment of cancers that have resulted in pleural effusion. Although the compound is a potent alkylating agent, resis- tance may develop as a result of increased inactivation by sulfhydryl containing proteins such as glutathione and increased expression of DNA repair mechanisms. Adverse effects include dose-limiting myelosuppression and nau- sea/vomiting. There is a significant risk of extravasation upon IV administration, and the agent may produce pain at the injection site. Additional adverse effects include alopecia, azoospermia, amenorrhea, hyperuricemia, and an increased risk of secondary cancers. CHLORAMBUCIL (AMBOCHLORIN, ABMOCLORIN, LEUKERAN) Chlorambucil is available as 2-mg tablets for oral adminis- tration in the treatment of Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia in combination with pred- nisone and as a single agent. The mechanisms of resistance are the same as those seen for other agents of the class such as mechlorethamine. The agent is well absorbed (75%) upon oral administration and highly protein bound. Metabolism is mediated by CYP and occurs extensively to give several metabolites, including the active phenylacetic acid–nitrogen mustard. The drug is eliminated via the kidneys with a ter- minal elimination half-life of 1.5 hours. Adverse effects in- clude dose-limiting myelosuppression, which are seen as both leucopenia and thrombocytopenia. Nausea and vomit- ing occur less often than for mechlorethamine. Additional adverse effects include hyperuricemia, azoospermia, amen- orrhea, seizures, pulmonary fibrosis, and skin rash. 368 Wilson and Gisvold’s Textbook of Organic Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry Scheme 10.14 Metabolic and chemical activation of dacarbazine and temozolomide.