toxicity has occurred when pentostatin and fludarabine are used in combination. Toxicities include myelosuppression, immunosuppression, nausea, vomiting, headache, lethargy, and fatigue. METHOTREXATE (MTX, ABITREXATE, MEXATE, FOLEX) The drug is available in 50-, 100-, 200-, and 1,000-mg vials for IV use. Methotrexate is used to treat several cancer types including breast cancer, bladder cancer, colorectal cancer, and head and neck cancer. The mechanism of action of methotrexate involves inhibition of DHFR leading to a de- pletion of critical reduced folates. The reduced folates are necessary for biosynthesis of several purines and pyrim- idines. Resistance to methotrexate can occur because of decreased carrier-mediated transport of drug into cells or increased expression of the target enzyme DHFR. Oral bioavailability varies with dose because of saturable uptake processes, and high doses are required to reach therapeutic levels in the CNS. The majority of drug dosage is excreted unchanged in the urine. The renal excretion of methotrexate is inhibited by several carboxylic acid drugs such as peni- cillins, probenecid, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, and aspirin. Methotrexate enhances 5-FU antitumor effects when given 24 hours prior to the fluoropyrimidine. Methotrexate toxicity includes myelosuppression, mucosi- tis, nausea, vomiting, severe headaches, renal toxicity, acute cerebral dysfunction, skin rash, and hyperpigmentation. PEMETREXED (MTA, ALIMTA) The drug is available in a 100-mg sterile vial for IV use. The drug appears to be effective against a range of tumors in- cluding mesothelioma, NSCLC, colorectal cancer, bladder cancer, and lung cancer. The mechanism of action involves inhibition of TS resulting in inhibition of thymidylate and DNA synthesis. This drug is a pyrrolopyrimidine analog of folate with antifolate activity. Resistance can occur by in- creased expression of TS, decreased binding affinity for TS, or decreased drug transport into cells. The drug is adminis- tered only via the IV route and distributes to all tissues. Cellular activation to the more potent polyglutamated forms occurs, and the majority of the dose is excreted unchanged in the urine. The drug interaction and toxicity profiles are similar to that of methotrexate. TRIMETREXATE (TMTX, NEUTREXIN) The drug is available as a lyophilized powder in 5- or 30-mg vials for IV use. The drug is used to treat colorectal cancer, head and neck cancer as well as NSCLC. The mechanism of action of trimetrexate involves folate antagonism and inhi- bition of thymidylate synthesis. Trimetrexate does not form intracellular polyglutamate adducts as does methotrexate and other related compounds. Resistance can occur by in- creased expression of the target enzyme, decreased binding affinity for the target enzyme, or decreased intracellular drug transport. Trimetrexate is administered only by the IV route and distributed throughout the body with extensive binding to plasma proteins. The major catabolic pathways involve O-demethylation followed by glucuronide conjuga- tion. The drug interaction and toxicity profiles are similar to those for methotrexate. HYDROXYUREA (DROXIA, HYDREA) HONH-CO-NH2. The drug is available in a 500-mg capsule for oral use. Hydroxyurea is often considered an an- timetabolite drug, and it is used to treat myelogenous leukemia, ovarian cancer, and essential thrombocytosis. The mechanism of action of hydroxyurea involves inhibition of DNA biosynthesis by inhibition of the enzyme ribonu- cleotide reductase (see Fig. 10.15). Resistance can occur via increased expression of ribonucleotide reductase. The oral bioavailability is quite high approaching 100% and the drug is distributed to all tissues. Hydroxyurea readily enters the CNS and distributes to human breast milk. A major portion of the total dose is excreted unchanged in the urine. The drug has been shown to increase the toxicity of 5-FU, and hydroxyurea may increase the effectiveness of some an- timetabolite HIV drugs. The toxicity profile includes myelo- suppression, leucopenia, nausea, vomiting, pruritus hyper- pigmentation, headache, drowsiness, and confusion. ANTIBIOTICS AND NATURAL PRODUCTS A variety of the anticancer agents available today are derived from natural sources with several of these being obtained from microbial sources (antibiotics). Many of the antineo- plastic antibiotics are produced by the soil fungus Streptomyces. Both the antibiotic and natural product classes have multiple inhibitory effects on cell growth; however, they primarily act to disrupt DNA function and cell division. There are several mechanisms by which these agents tar- get DNA, including intercalation, alkylation, and strand breakage either directly or as a result of enzyme inhibition. Intercalation is a process by which a planar molecule of the appropriate size inserts itself between adjacent base pairs of DNA and in so doing, it causes a local unwinding that may disrupt the normal template function of DNA. Intercalation requires that the drug induce a cavity between base pairs so that insertion may occur. The interaction of the intercala- tor and the adjacent base pairs occurs by the overlap of p-orbitals of the intercalator and the base pairs. The p-orbitals of the intercalation species are provided by a com- bination of aromatic and conjugated systems that impart the planarity required for intercalation. The drug–DNA interac- tion is further stabilized by side chains attached to the inter- calation species. The side chains often include a cationic moiety, which may form ionic bonds with the anionic phos- phate backbone. Alternative modes of stabilization may occur through a combination of van der Waals interaction or hydrogen bonds. The overall result of these interactions is to cause a local bend or kink in DNA resulting in a local shape distortion. This may produce several effects but is often as- sociated with inhibition of normal DNA function. By virtue of their ability to induce bends or kinks in DNA, intercalators may also result in inhibition of topoisomerase enzymes. In order for the cell to store the nearly 2 m of DNA that it contains, it is necessary to fold the genetic material into a more compact form and in the process, knots and tangles are produced. Topoisomerase en- zymes are responsible for the unwinding and relaxation of DNA so that transcription may occur.67 There are two major types of topoisomerase enzymes, which are important sites Chapter 10 Antineoplastic Agents 383