palpitations, headache, and lassitude. Some patients develop a positive test for antinuclear factor in serum while on prazosin therapy, but this has not been associated with rheumatic symptoms. The α1 blockers do not adversely and may even beneficially affect plasma lipid profiles, but this action has not been shown to confer any benefit on clinical outcomes. OTHER ALPHA­ADRENOCEPTOR–BLOCKING AGENTS The nonselective agents, phentolamine and phenoxybenzamine, are useful in diagnosis and treatment of pheochromocytoma and in other clinical situations associated with exaggerated release of catecholamines (eg, phentolamine may be combined with a β blocker to treat the clonidine withdrawal syndrome, described previously). Their pharmacology is described in Chapter 10. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF ANTIHYPERTENSIVE AGENTS Hypertension presents a unique problem in therapeutics. It is usually a lifelong disease that causes few symptoms until the advanced stage. For effective treatment, medicines that may be expensive and sometimes produce adverse effects must be consumed daily. Thus, the physician must establish with certainty that hypertension is persistent and requires treatment and must exclude secondary causes of hypertension that might be treated by definitive surgical procedures. Persistence of hypertension, particularly in persons with mild elevation of blood pressure, should be established by finding an elevated blood pressure with multiple measurements on at least three different office visits. Home or ambulatory blood pressure monitoring may be the best predictor of risk and therefore of need for therapy in mild hypertension, and is recommended for initial evaluation of all patients. Isolated systolic hypertension and hypertension in the elderly also benefit from therapy. Once the presence of hypertension is established, the question of whether to treat with medications and which drugs to use must be considered. The level of blood pressure, the age of the patient, the severity of organ damage (if any) due to high blood pressure, and the cardiovascular risk factors all must be considered. Current guidelines suggest treating people with medications for blood pressure of 140/90 mm Hg or greater if 10­year cardiovascular disease risk is less than 10%, and treatment at or above 130/80 if 10­year risk is 10% or greater. Assessment of renal function and the presence of proteinuria are useful in antihypertensive drug selection. Treatment thresholds and goals are described in Table 11–1. At this stage, the patient must be educated about the nature of hypertension and the importance of treatment so that he or she can make an informed decision regarding therapy. Once the decision is made to treat, a therapeutic regimen must be developed. Selection of drugs is dictated by the level of blood pressure, the presence and severity of end­organ damage, and the presence of other diseases. Severe high blood pressure with life­threatening complications requires more rapid treatment with more efficacious drugs. Most patients with essential hypertension, however, have had elevated blood pressure for months or years, and therapy is best initiated in a gradual fashion. Education about the natural history of hypertension and the importance of treatment adherence as well as potential adverse effects of drugs is essential. Obesity should be treated, and drugs that increase blood pressure (sympathomimetic decongestants, nonsteroidal anti­inflammatory drugs, estrogen­containing oral contraceptives, stimulant drug abuse, and some herbal medications) should be eliminated if possible. Follow­up visits should be frequent enough to convince the patient that the physician thinks the illness is serious. With each follow­up visit, the importance of treatment should be reinforced and questions concerning dosing or side effects of medication encouraged. Other factors that may improve compliance are simplifying dosing regimens and having the patient monitor blood pressure at home. OUTPATIENT THERAPY OF HYPERTENSION The initial step in treating hypertension may be nonpharmacologic. Sodium restriction may be effective treatment for some patients with mild hypertension. Weight reduction has been shown to normalize blood pressure in up to 75% of overweight patients with mild to moderate hypertension. Dietary sodium restriction should be recommended. The average American diet contains about 200 mEq of sodium per day. A reasonable dietary goal in treating hypertension is 70–100 mEq of sodium per day, which can be achieved by not salting food during or after cooking and by avoiding processed foods that contain large amounts of sodium. Eating a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, and low­fat dairy products with a reduced content of saturated and total fat, and moderation of alcohol intake (no more than two drinks per day) also lower blood pressure. Both the DASH (Dietary Approach to Stop Hypertension) and more recently the Chinese Heart­Healthy Diet have been demonstrated to reduce blood pressure in hypertensive adults. Using salt that substitutes potassium for some of the sodium reduces blood pressure and risk of future cardiovascular events. Regular exercise has been shown in some but not all studies to lower blood pressure in hypertensive patients.