111 Heart Failure | CHAPTER 9 mcg/kg/min. Taper nitroprusside slowly when transitioning to oral medications to avoid the rebound phenomenon of reflex neurohormonal activation after abrupt withdrawal. Nitroprusside-induced cyanide and thiocyanate toxicity are unlikely when doses <3 mcg/kg/min are administered for less than 3 days, except in patients with significant renal impairment (ie, serum creatinine >3 mg/dL [265 μmol/L]). Inotropes • Prompt correction of low CO in patients with “cold” subsets (III and IV) is required to restore peripheral tissue perfusion and preserve end-organ function. Although IV inotropes can improve hypoperfusion by enhancing cardiac contractility, potential adverse outcomes limit their use to select patients with refractory ADHF. Inotropes should be considered only as a temporizing measure to maintain end-organ perfu- sion in patients with cardiogenic shock or severely depressed CO and low systolic BP (ie, ineligible for IV vasodilators) until definitive therapy can be initiated, as a “bridge” for patients with advanced HF who are eligible for MCS or cardiac trans- plantation, or for palliation of symptoms in patients with advanced HF who are ineligible for MCS or cardiac transplantation. • Dobutamine and milrinone produce similar hemodynamic effects, but dobutamine usually causes more pronounced increases in HR, and milrinone is associated with greater relaxation in arterial smooth muscle. • Dobutamine is a β1- and β2-receptor agonist with some α1-agonist effects; its positive inotropic effects are due to effects on β1-receptors. Stimulation of cardiac β1-receptors does not generally produce a significant increase in HR. Modest periph- eral β2-receptor-mediated vasodilation tends to offset minor α1-receptor-mediated vasoconstriction; the net vascular effect is usually vasodilation. ✓ CI is increased because of inotropic stimulation, arterial vasodilation, and a vari- able increase in HR. It causes relatively little change in mean arterial pressure (MAP) compared with the more consistent increases observed with dopamine. Dobutamine should be considered over milrinone when a significant decrease in MAP might further compromise hemodynamic function. ✓ Vasodilation usually reduces PCWP, making dobutamine particularly useful in the presence of low CI and an elevated LV filling pressure; however, these effects may be detrimental in the presence of reduced filling pressure. ✓ Initial doses of 2.5–5 mcg/kg/min may be increased progressively to 20 mcg/kg/ min based on clinical and hemodynamic responses. The dose should be tapered rather than abruptly discontinued. ✓ Dobutamine’s major adverse effects are tachycardia and ventricular arrhythmias. Potentially detrimental increases in oxygen consumption have also been observed. • Milrinone inhibits phosphodiesterase III and produces positive inotropic and arte- rial and venous vasodilating effects (an inodilator). It has supplanted use of amri- none, which has a higher rate of thrombocytopenia. ✓ During IV administration, milrinone increases stroke volume and CO with mini- mal change in HR. However, the vasodilating effects may predominate, leading to decreased BP and a reflex tachycardia. Use milrinone cautiously in severely hypotensive HF patients because it does not increase, and may even decrease, arterial BP. ✓ Most patients are started on a continuous IV infusion of 0.1–0.3 mcg/kg/min, titrated to a maximum of 0.75 mcg/kg/min. A loading dose of 50 mcg/kg over 10 minutes can be given if rapid hemodynamic changes are required, but its use is uncommon due to an increased risk of hypotension. ✓ The most notable adverse events are arrhythmia, hypotension, and thrombocyto- penia. Measure the platelet count before and during therapy. • Norepinephrine and dopamine have combined inotropic and vasopressor activity. Although therapies that increase SVR are generally avoided in ADHF, they may be required in select patients where marked hypotension precludes use of tradi- tional inotropes (eg, septic shock, refractory cardiogenic shock). These agents are