106 SECTION 2 | Cardiovascular Disorders of β-blockers on mortality, clinicians should titrate to the maximum tolerated doses before considering use of ivabradine. • Ivabradine is indicated to reduce the risk of hospitalization for worsening HF in patients with LVEF ≤35% who are in sinus rhythm with resting HR ≥70 bpm and are either on a maximally tolerated dose of a β-blocker or have a contraindication to β-blocker use. • The usual starting dose is 5 mg twice daily with meals (Table 9-1). After 2 weeks of treatment, if the resting HR is between 50 and 60 bpm, the dose should be continued. If the HR is >60 bpm, the dose can be increased to the maximum of 7.5 mg twice daily. If at any point the HR is <50 bpm or the patient has symptomatic bradycardia, the dose should be reduced by 2.5 mg twice daily; if the patient is only receiving 2.5 mg twice daily, ivabradine should be discontinued. • The most common adverse effects are bradycardia, atrial fibrillation, and visual disturbances. Digoxin • Although digoxin has positive inotropic effects, its benefits in HF are related to its neurohormonal effects. It attenuates the excessive sympathetic nervous system activation in HF and increases parasympathetic activity, thereby decreasing HR and enhancing diastolic filling. Observational studies of digoxin conducted in the context of contemporary HF therapy showed either neutral effects or reductions in hospital- izations and either neutral or detrimental effects of digoxin on mortality. • Digoxin is not considered a first-line agent in HF, but a trial may be considered in conjunction with GDMT in patients with symptomatic HFrEF to improve symptoms and reduce hospitalizations. Digoxin may also be considered to help control ventricu- lar rate in patients with HFrEF and supraventricular arrhythmias. • The target serum digoxin concentration for most patients is 0.5–0.9 ng/mL (0.6–1.2 nmol/L). Most patients with normal renal function can achieve this level with a dose of 0.125 mg/day. Patients with decreased renal function, low body weight, advanced age, or interacting drugs (eg, amiodarone) should receive 0.125 mg every other day. Vericiguat • Vericiguat modulates endothelial dysfunction; it is a soluble guanylate cyclase activa- tor (sGC) that enhances the effect of nitric oxide (NO) to increase cGMP activity and regulate contractility and diastolic function. • In a clinical trial, patients with HFrEF receiving vericiguat demonstrated a signifi- cant, but modest, reduction in the primary endpoint of cardiovascular death or HF hospitalization. The drug was well tolerated overall, but there was an unexplained greater incidence of anemia in patients treated with vericiguat. • Its place in therapy is unclear given the limited benefit, but it may lie in the lack of significant hemodynamic, renal, and electrolyte effects in high-risk patients who often do not tolerate GDMT. It is not indicated in HFpEF due to lack of benefit and safety data. PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR HFpEF • Treatment includes controlling HR and BP, alleviating causes of myocardial ischemia, reducing volume, and restoring and maintaining sinus rhythm in patients with atrial fibrillation. Many of the drugs are the same as those used to treat HFrEF, but the rationale and dosing may be different. • ACE inhibitors, ARBs, and β -blockers have not demonstrated efficacy in the absence of other comorbid conditions such as HTN or myocardial infarction. • The diuretic doses used to treat HFpEF are generally much lower than those used to treat HFrEF. • Calcium channel blockers (eg, diltiazem, amlodipine, verapamil) may be useful when treating HTN. • ARNIs and SGLT2 inhibitors are beneficial in select patients with HFpEF.