107 Heart Failure | CHAPTER 9 TREATMENT OF ACUTE DECOMPENSATED HEART FAILURE (ADHF) GENERAL APPROACH • Acute decompensated heart failure involves patients with new or worsening signs or symptoms (often resulting from volume overload and/or low CO) requiring medical intervention, such as emergency department visit or hospitalization. • Goals of Treatment: The overall goals are to relieve symptoms, improve hemody- namic stability, and reduce short-term mortality so the patient can be discharged in a stable compensated state on oral drug therapy. • Consider hospitalization based on clinical findings. Admission to an intensive care unit (ICU) may be required if the patient experiences hemodynamic instability requiring frequent monitoring of vital signs, invasive hemodynamic monitoring, or rapid titration of IV medications with close monitoring. • Focus on the history and physical exam on potential etiologies of ADHF; presence of precipitating factors; onset, duration, and severity of symptoms; and a careful medication history. • Symptoms of volume overload include dyspnea, orthopnea, PND, ascites, GI symp- toms (poor appetite, nausea, early satiety), peripheral edema, and weight gain. Low output symptoms include altered mental status, fatigue, GI symptoms (similar to volume overload), and decreased urine output. • Signs of volume overload include pulmonary crackles, elevated jugular venous pressure, HJR, S3 gallop, and peripheral edema. Low output signs include tachycar- dia, hypotension (more commonly) or hypertension, narrow pulse pressure, cool extremities, pallor, and cachexia. • Laboratory tests: B- type natriuretic peptide (BNP) <100 pg/mL (ng/L; 29 pmol/L) and N- terminal BNP <300 pg/mL (ng/L; 35 pmol/L) are negatively predictive for congestive ADHF; serum sodium concentration <130 mEq/L (mmol/L); elevated alkaline phosphatase; elevated gamma- glutamyl transferase. • Ascertain hemodynamic status to guide initial therapy. Patients may be categorized into one of four hemodynamic subsets based on volume status (euvolemic or “dry” vs volume overloaded or “wet”) and CO (adequate CO or “warm” vs hypoperfusion or “cold”) (Fig. 9-2). • In patients who require invasive hemodynamic monitoring, measure pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) and cardiac Index. • Assess medications being taken prior to admission and determine whether adjust- ment or discontinuation is required. • If fluid retention is evident on physical exam, pursue aggressive diuresis, preferably with IV diuretics. • In the absence of cardiogenic shock or symptomatic hypotension, strive to continue all GDMT for HF. β-blockers may be temporarily held or dose-reduced if recent changes are responsible for acute decompensation. Other GDMT (ACE inhibitors, ARBs, ARNI, and aldosterone antagonists) may also need to be temporarily withheld in the presence of renal dysfunction, with close monitoring of serum potassium. Most patients may continue to receive digoxin at doses targeting a trough serum concen- tration of 0.5–0.9 ng/mL (mcg/L; 0.6–1.2 nmol/L). NONPHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR ADHF • Place all patients with congestive symptoms on sodium restriction (<2 g daily) and consider fluid restriction for refractory symptoms. • Consider noninvasive ventilation for patients in respiratory distress due to acute pulmonary edema, particularly those at risk for intubation. • Provide pharmacologic thromboprophylaxis with unfractionated heparin or low- molecular-weight heparin for most patients with limited mobility; consider mechani- cal thromboprophylaxis with intermittent pneumatic compression devices in patients at high risk for bleeding.