In normal subjects without coronary disease, nitroglycerin can induce a significant, if transient, increase in total coronary blood flow. In contrast, there is no evidence that total coronary flow is increased in patients with angina due to atherosclerotic obstructive coronary artery disease. However, some studies suggest that redistribution of coronary flow from normal to ischemic regions may play a role in nitroglycerin’s therapeutic effect. Nitroglycerin also exerts a weak negative inotropic effect on the heart via nitric oxide. 2. Other smooth muscle organs Relaxation of smooth muscle of the bronchi, gastrointestinal tract (including biliary system), and genitourinary tract has been demonstrated experimentally. Because of their brief duration, these actions of the nitrates are rarely of any clinical value. During recent decades, the use of amyl nitrite and isobutyl nitrite (not nitrates) by inhalation as recreational (sex­enhancing) drugs has become popular with some people. Nitrites readily release nitric oxide in erectile tissue as well as vascular smooth muscle and activate guanylyl cyclase. The resulting increase in cGMP causes dephosphorylation of myosin light chains and relaxation (see Figure 12–2), which enhances erection. This pharmacologic approach to erectile dysfunction is discussed in the Box: Drugs Used in the Treatment of Erectile Dysfunction. Drugs Used in the Treatment of Erectile Dysfunction Erectile dysfunction in men has long been the subject of research (by both amateur and professional scientists) and is heavily promoted on the internet by quacks. Among the substances used in the past and generally discredited are “Spanish Fly” (a bladder and urethral irritant), yohimbine (an α2 antagonist; see Chapter 10), nutmeg, and mixtures containing lead, arsenic, or strychnine. Substances currently favored by practitioners of herbal medicine but of dubious value include ginseng and kava. Scientific studies of the process have shown that erection requires relaxation of the nonvascular smooth muscle of the corpora cavernosa. This relaxation permits inflow of blood at nearly arterial pressure into the sinuses of the cavernosa, and it is the pressure of the blood that causes erection. (With regard to other aspects of male sexual function, ejaculation requires intact sympathetic motor function, while orgasm involves independent superficial and deep sensory nerves.) Physiologic erection occurs in response to the release of nitric oxide from nonadrenergic­ noncholinergic nerves (see Chapter 6) associated with parasympathetic discharge. Thus, parasympathetic motor innervation must be intact and nitric oxide synthesis must be active. (A similar process occurs in female erectile tissues.) Certain other smooth muscle relaxants—eg, PGE1 analogs or α­adrenoceptor antagonists—if present in high enough concentration, can independently cause sufficient cavernosal relaxation to result in erection. As noted in the text, nitric oxide activates guanylyl cyclase, which increases the concentration of cGMP, and the latter second messenger stimulates the dephosphorylation of myosin light chains (see Figure 12–2) and relaxation of the smooth muscle. Thus, any drug that increases cGMP might be of value in erectile dysfunction if normal innervation is present. Sildenafil (Viagra) and congeners act to increase cGMP by inhibiting its breakdown by phosphodiesterase isoform 5 (PDE­5). Three similar PDE­5 inhibitors (PDE­5I), tadalafil, vardenafil, and avanafil, are available. These drugs have been very successful in the marketplace because they can be taken orally. However, they are of little or no value in men with loss of potency due to cord injury or other damage to innervation and in men lacking libido. Furthermore, PDE­5Is potentiate the action of nitrates used for angina, and severe hypotension and a few myocardial infarctions have been reported in men taking a nitrate plus a PDE­5I. It is recommended that at least 6 hours pass between use of a nitrate and the ingestion of PDE­5 inhbitors. PDE­5Is also have effects on color vision, causing difficulty in blue­green discrimination. It is important to be aware that numerous nonprescription mail­order products that contain sildenafil analogs such as hydroxythiohomosildenafil and sulfoaildenafil have been marketed as “male enhancement” agents. These products are not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and incur the same risk of dangerous interactions with nitrates as the approved agents. PDE­5 inhibitors have also been studied for possible use in other conditions. Clinical studies show distinct benefit in some patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension but not in patients with advanced idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The drugs have possible benefit in systemic hypertension, cystic fibrosis, and benign prostatic hyperplasia. Both sildenafil and tadalafil are currently approved for pulmonary hypertension. Preclinical studies suggest that sildenafil may be useful in preventing apoptosis and cardiac remodeling after ischemia and reperfusion. The drug most commonly used for erectile dysfunction in patients who do not respond to PDE­5Is is alprostadil, a PGE1 analog (see Chapter 18) that can be injected directly into the cavernosa or placed in the urethra as a minisuppository, from which it diffuses into the cavernosal tissue. Phentolamine can be used by injection into the cavernosa. These drugs will cause erection in most men who do not respond to PDE­5Is.