Some patients have a more indolent autoimmune process and initially retain enough beta cell function to avoid ketosis. They can be treated at first with oral glucose­lowering agents but then need insulin as their beta cell function declines. Antibody studies in northern Europeans indicate that up to 10–15% of “type 2” patients may actually have this milder form of type 1 diabetes (latent autoimmune diabetes of adulthood; LADA). The CD3 complex is the major signal­transducing element of the T­cell receptor, and anti­CD3 antibodies have been shown to modulate the autoimmune response in persons with type 1 diabetes. Teplizumab­mzwv, a humanized monoclonal antibody against CD3, has been approved for use in individuals at high risk for type 1 diabetes (two positive antibodies and impaired glucose tolerance [stage 2 type 1 diabetes]) age 8 and older. The drug is infused daily for 14 days. The treatment delays the time to onset of overt type 1 diabetes (ie, stage 3 type 1 diabetes) by 25 months. Common adverse reactions include transient decreases in white cell and lymphocyte counts, rash, and headache. Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Type 2 diabetes is a heterogenous group of conditions characterized by tissue resistance to the action of insulin combined with a relative deficiency in insulin secretion. A given individual may have more insulin resistance or more beta cell deficiency, and the glucose abnormalities may be mild or severe. Although the circulating endogenous insulin is sufficient to prevent ketoacidosis, it is inadequate to prevent hyperglycemia. Patients with type 2 diabetes can initially be controlled with diet, exercise, and non­insulin glucose­lowering drugs (oral and injectable). Some patients have progressive beta cell failure and eventually may also need insulin therapy. Other Specific Types of Diabetes Mellitus The “other” designation refers to multiple other specific causes of an elevated blood glucose: pancreatectomy, pancreatitis, non­pancreatic diseases, drug therapy, etc. For a detailed list the reader is referred to the American Diabetes Association report, 2014. Gestational Diabetes Mellitus Gestational diabetes (GDM) is defined as any abnormality in glucose levels noted for the first time during pregnancy. Gestational diabetes is diagnosed in approximately 7% of all pregnancies in the United States. During pregnancy, the placenta and placental hormones create an insulin resistance that is most pronounced in the last trimester. Risk assessment for diabetes is suggested starting at the first prenatal visit. High­risk women should be screened immediately. Screening may be deferred in lower­risk women until the 24th to 28th week of gestation. Laboratory Findings A. Plasma or Serum Glucose A plasma glucose level of 126 mg/dL (7 mmol/L) or higher on more than one occasion after at least 8 hours of fasting is diagnostic of diabetes mellitus (see Table 41–4). Fasting plasma glucose levels of 100–125 mg/dL (5.6–6.9 mmol/L) are associated with increased risk of diabetes (impaired fasting glucose tolerance). TABLE 41–4 Diagnostic criteria for diabetes. Normal Glucose Tolerance, mg/dL (mMol/L) Prediabetes Diabetes Mellitus2 Fasting plasma glucose mg/dL (mmol/L) <100 (5.6) 100–125 (5.6–6.9) (impaired fasting glucose) ≥126 (7.0) Two hours after glucose load1 mg/dL (mmol/L) <140 (7.8) ≥140.199 (7.8–11.0) (impaired glucose tolerance) ≥200 (11.1)