agents being conjugated to their nucleotide form (acyclovir phosphorylated to acyclovir triphosphate). Often both the parent drug and its metabolite are active, which has led to ad- ditional commercial products, instead of just one being mar- keted. About 75% to 80% of phenacetin (now withdrawn from the U.S. market) is converted to acetaminophen. In the tricyclic antidepressant series (see Chapter 12), imipramine and amitriptyline are N-demethylated to desipramine and nortriptyline, respectively. All four compounds have been marketed in the United States. Drug metabolism is discussed more fully in Chapter 3. Although a drug’s metabolism can be a source of frustra- tion for the medicinal chemist, pharmacist, and physician and lead to inconvenience and compliance problems with the patient, it is fortunate that the body has the ability to me- tabolize foreign molecules (xenobiotics). Otherwise, many of these substances could remain in the body for years. This has been the complaint against certain lipophilic chemical pollutants, including the once very popular insecticide dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT). After entering the body, these chemicals reside in body tissues, slowly diffus- ing out of the depots and potentially harming the individual on a chronic basis for several years. They can also reside in tissues of commercial food animals that have been slaugh- tered before the drug has washed out of the body. Excretion The main route of excretion of a drug and its metabolites is through the kidney. For some drugs, enterohepatic circula- tion (Fig. 2.1), in which the drug reenters the intestinal tract from the liver through the bile duct, can be an important part of the agent’s distribution in the body and route of excretion. Either the drug or drug metabolite can reenter systemic cir- culation by passing once again through the intestinal mu- cosa. A portion of either also may be excreted in the feces. Nursing mothers must be concerned, because drugs and their metabolites can be excreted in human milk and be in- gested by the nursing infant. One should keep a sense of perspective when learning about drug metabolism. As explained in Chapter 3, drug me- tabolism can be conceptualized as occurring in two stages or phases. Intermediate metabolites that are pharmacologically active usually are produced by phase I reactions. The prod- ucts from the phase I chemistry are converted into inactive, usually water-soluble end products by phase II reactions. The latter, commonly called conjugation reactions, can be thought of as synthetic reactions that involve addition of water-soluble substituents. In human drug metabolism, the main conjugation reactions add glucuronic acid, sulfate, or glutathione. Obviously, drugs that are bound to serum pro- tein or show favorable partitioning into tissue depots are going to be metabolized and excreted more slowly for the reasons discussed previously. This does not mean that drugs that remain in the body for longer periods of time can be administered in lower doses or be taken fewer times per day by the patient. Several vari- ables determine dosing regimens, of which the affinity of the drug for the receptor is crucial. Reexamine Reaction 2.1 and Figure 2.1. If the equilibrium does not favor formation of the drug–receptor complex, higher and usually more fre- quent doses must be administered. Further, if partitioning into tissue stores or metabolic degradation and/or excretion is favored, it will take more of the drug and usually more frequent administration to maintain therapeutic concentra- tions at the receptor. The Receptor With the possible exception of general anesthetics (see Chapter 22), the working model for a pharmacological re- sponse consists of a drug binding to a specific receptor. Many drug receptors are the same as those used by endoge- nously produced ligands. Cholinergic agents interact with the same receptors as the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. 8 Wilson and Gisvold’s Textbook of Organic Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry