FIGURE 41–5 Extent and duration of action of various types of insulin as indicated by the glucose infusion rates (mg/kg/min) required to maintain a constant glucose concentration. The durations of action shown are typical of an average dose of 0.2–0.3 U/kg. The durations of regular and NPH insulin increase considerably when dosage is increased. 2. Insulin glargine Insulin glargine is a soluble, “peakless” (ie, having a broad plasma concentration plateau), long­acting insulin analog. The attachment of two arginine molecules to the B­chain carboxyl terminal and substitution of a glycine for asparagine at the A21 position created an analog that is soluble in an acidic solution but precipitates in the more neutral body pH after subcutaneous injection. Individual insulin molecules slowly dissolve away from the crystalline depot and provide a low, continuous level of circulating insulin. Insulin glargine has a slow onset of action (0.5–1 hours) and the effective duration of action is approximately 24 hours. Glargine is usually given once daily, although some very insulin­sensitive individuals (requiring small doses, less than about 20 units daily) or insulin­resistant individuals (requiring very large doses) benefit from split (twice a day) dosing. To maintain solubility, the formulation is unusually acidic (pH 4.0), and insulin glargine should not be mixed with other insulins. If administered via a syringe, a separate syringe must be used to minimize the risk of contamination and subsequent loss of efficacy. The absorption pattern of insulin glargine appears to be independent of the anatomic site of injection, and this drug is associated with less immunogenicity than human insulin in animal studies. Glargine’s interaction with the insulin receptor is similar to that of native insulin and shows no increase in mitogenic activity in vitro. It has sixfold to sevenfold greater binding than native insulin to the insulin­like growth factor 1 (IGF­1) receptor, but the clinical significance of this is unclear. 3. Insulin detemir In this insulin, the terminal threonine is dropped from the B30 position and myristic acid (a C­14 fatty acid chain) is attached to the B29 lysine. These modifications prolong the availability of the injected analog by increasing both self­aggregation in subcutaneous tissue and reversible albumin binding. The affinity of insulin detemir is four­ to five­fold lower than that of human soluble insulin and, therefore, the U100 formulation of insulin detemir has a concentration of 2400 nmol/mL compared with 600 nmol/mL for NPH. The duration of action for insulin detemir is about 17 hours at therapeutically relevant doses. It is recommended that the insulin be injected once or twice a day to achieve a stable basal coverage. This insulin has been reported to have lower within­subject pharmacodynamic variability compared with NPH insulin and insulin glargine. 4. Insulin degludec In this insulin analog, the threonine at position B30 has been removed and the lysine at position B29 is conjugated to hexadecanoic acid via a gamma­L­ glutamyl spacer. In solution and in the presence of phenol and zinc, the insulin is in the form of dihexamers; however, when injected subcutaneously, it self­associates into large multihexameric chains consisting of thousands of dihexamers. The chains slowly dissolve in the subcutaneous tissue, and insulin monomers are steadily released into the systemic circulation. The half­life of the insulin is 25 hours. Its onset of action is in 30–90 minutes, and its duration of action is more than 42 hours. Degludec is generally injected once a day to achieve a stable basal coverage. Insulin degludec is available in two concentrations, U100 and U200, and in prefilled disposable pens.