tolerance may vary. Therefore, pharmacokinetic factors govern the choice of agent and mode of therapy when using the nitrates. Pharmacokinetics The liver contains a high­capacity organic nitrate reductase that removes nitrate groups in a stepwise fashion from the parent molecule and ultimately inactivates the drug. Therefore, oral bioavailability of the traditional organic nitrates (eg, nitroglycerin and isosorbide dinitrate) is low (typically <10–20%). For this reason, the sublingual route, which avoids the first­pass effect, is preferred for achieving a therapeutic blood level rapidly. Nitroglycerin and isosorbide dinitrate both are absorbed efficiently by the sublingual route and reach therapeutic blood levels within a few minutes. However, the total dose administered by this route must be limited to avoid excessive effect; therefore, the total duration of effect is brief (15–30 minutes). When much longer duration of action is needed, oral preparations can be given that contain an amount of drug sufficient to result in sustained systemic blood levels of the parent drug plus active metabolites. Pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN) is another organic nitrate that has been promoted for oral use as a “long­acting” nitrate (>6 hours). This drug has also been reported to reduce pulmonary hypertension in experimental animals. Other routes of administration available for nitroglycerin include transdermal and buccal absorption from slow­release preparations (described below). Amyl nitrite and related nitrites are highly volatile liquids. Amyl nitrite is available in fragile glass ampules (“poppers”) packaged in a protective cloth covering. The ampule can be crushed with the fingers, resulting in rapid release of vapors inhalable through the cloth covering. The inhalation route provides very rapid absorption and, like the sublingual route, avoids the hepatic first­pass effect. Because of its unpleasant odor and extremely short duration of action, amyl nitrite is now obsolete for angina. Once absorbed, the unchanged organic nitrate compounds have half­lives of only 2–8 minutes. The partially denitrated metabolites have much longer half­lives (up to 3 hours). Of the nitroglycerin metabolites (two dinitroglycerins and two mononitro forms), the 1,2­dinitro derivative has significant vasodilator efficacy and probably provides most of the therapeutic effect of orally administered nitroglycerin. The 5­mononitrate metabolite of isosorbide dinitrate is an active metabolite of the latter drug and is available for oral use as isosorbide mononitrate. It has a bioavailability of 100%. Excretion, primarily in the form of glucuronide derivatives of the denitrated metabolites, is largely by way of the kidney. Pharmacodynamics A. Mechanism of Action in Smooth Muscle After more than a century of study, the mechanism of action of nitroglycerin is partially understood. There is general agreement that the drug must be bioactivated with the release of nitric oxide. Unlike nitroprusside (Chapter 11) and some other direct nitric oxide donors, nitroglycerin activation requires enzymatic action. Nitroglycerin can be denitrated by glutathione S­transferase in smooth muscle and other cells. A mitochondrial enzyme, aldehyde dehydrogenase isoform 2 (ALDH2) and possibly isoform 3 (ALDH3), appears to be key in the activation and release of nitric oxide from nitroglycerin and pentaerythritol tetranitrate. Different enzymes may be involved in the denitration of isosorbide dinitrate and mononitrate. Free nitrite ion is released, which is then converted to nitric oxide (see Chapter 19). Nitric oxide (probably complexed with cysteine) combines with the heme group of soluble guanylyl cyclase, activating that enzyme and causing an increase in cGMP. As shown in Figure 12–2, formation of cGMP represents a first step toward smooth muscle relaxation. The production of prostaglandin E or prostacyclin (PGI2) and membrane hyperpolarization may also be involved. There is no evidence that autonomic receptors are involved in the primary nitrate response. However, autonomic reflex responses, evoked when hypotensive doses are given, are common and may be significant. As described in the following text, tolerance is another important consideration in the use of nitrates. Although tolerance may be caused in part by a decrease in tissue sulfhydryl groups, eg, on cysteine, tolerance can be only partially prevented or reversed with a sulfhydryl­regenerating agent. Increased generation of free radicals during nitrate therapy may be another important mechanism of tolerance. Some evidence suggests that diminished availability of calcitonin gene­related peptide (CGRP, a potent vasodilator) is also associated with nitrate tolerance.