542 SECTIOn Ix Special Topics (A) A more recent technique permits estimation of total energy expenditure over a period of 1 to 2 weeks, using dual isotopically labeled water, 2H2 18O. 2H is lost from the body only in water, while 18O is lost in both water and carbon dioxide; the difference in the rate of loss of the two labels permits esti- mation of total carbon dioxide production, and hence oxygen consumption and energy expenditure (Figure 43–4). Basal metabolic rate (BMR) is the energy expenditure by the body when at rest, but not asleep, under controlled conditions of thermal neutrality, measured about 12 hours after the last meal, and depends on weight, age, and gender. Total energy expenditure depends on the BMR, the energy required for physical activity, and the energy cost of synthe- sizing reserves in the fed state. It is therefore possible to esti- mate an individual’s energy requirement from body weight, age, gender, and level of physical activity. Body weight affects Intestinal lumen Duodenal mucosal cell Bloodstream Heme transporter Divalent metal transporter Heme oxygenase Ferroportin Ascorbate, etc Fe2+ Fe2+ Fe2+ Fe3+ Fe3+ Fe3+ Feritin Fe3+ transferrin Downregulated by hepcidin apotransferrin Heme Heme – FIGURE 43–3 Absorption of iron. Hepcidin secreted by the liver downregulates synthesis of ferroportin and limits iron absorption. 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 5 10 15 20 25 Days since ingesting dual-labelled water Relative isotope enrichment 2H 18O FIGURE 43-4 Dual isotopically labeled water for estimation of energy expenditure. BMR because there is a greater amount of active tissue in a larger body. The decrease in BMR with increasing age, even when body weight remains constant, is the result of muscle tis- sue replacement by adipose tissue, which is metabolically less active. Similarly, women have a significantly lower BMR than do men of the same body weight and age because women’s bodies contain proportionally more adipose tissue. Energy requirements Increase With Activity The most useful way of expressing the energy cost of physical activities is as a multiple of BMR. This is known as the physi- cal activity ratio (PAR) or metabolic equivalent of the task (MET). Sedentary activities use only about 1.1 to 1.2 × BMR. By contrast, vigorous exertion, such as climbing stairs, cross- country walking uphill, etc, may use 6 to 8 × BMR. The overall physical activity level (PAL) is the sum of the PAR of different activities, multiplied by the time taken for that activity, divided by 24 hours. Ten percent of the Energy Yield of a Meal May Be Expended in Forming reserves There is a considerable increase in metabolic rate after a meal (diet-induced thermogenesis). A small part of this is the energy cost of secreting digestive enzymes and of active trans- port of the products of digestion; the major part is the result of synthesizing reserves of glycogen, triacylglycerol, and protein. There Are Two Extreme Forms of Undernutrition Marasmus can occur in both adults and children and occurs in vulnerable groups of all populations. Kwashiorkor affects Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library