Carbohydrate metabolism 196 It may present at any age. Multiple tumours may occur and may be part of the syndrome of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN). As with other functioning endocrine tumours, hormone secretion is inappropriate and usually excessive. C-peptide and proinsulin are released in parallel with insulin, and plasma concentrations are therefore inappropriately high in the presence of hypoglycaemia. Some insulinomas secrete just proinsulin. Attacks of hypoglycaemia occur typically at night and before breakfast, associated with hunger, and may be precipitated by strenuous exercise. Personality or behavioural changes may be the ﬁ rst feature; some patients present initially to psychiatrists. Insulin antibodies can form in response to exogenous insulin, probably less so for human insulin than for animal types. Sometimes insulin antibodies form despite the patient never having been exposed to exogenous insulin – autoimmune insulin syndrome (AIS). Insulin receptor antibodies may cause hypoglycaemia, although they sometimes lead to insulin resistance and hyperglycaemia. Reactive (functional) hypoglycaemia Some people develop symptomatic hypoglycaemia between 2 and 4 h after a meal or a glucose load. Loss of consciousness is very rare. Similar symptoms may follow a gastrectomy or bariatric gastric banding, when rapid passage of glucose into the intestine, and rapid absorption, may stimulate excessive insulin secretion (‘late dumping syndrome’). Reactive hypoglycaemia is uncommon. Alcohol-induced hypoglycaemia Hypoglycaemia may develop between 2 and 10 h after the ingestion of large amounts of alcohol. It is found most often in undernourished subjects and chronic alcoholics but may occur in young subjects when they first drink alcohol. Hypoglycaemia is probably caused by the suppression of gluconeogenesis during the metabolism of alcohol. Differentiation of hypoglycaemia from alcoholic stupor may be impossible unless the plasma glucose concentration is estimated. It may be necessary to infuse glucose frequently during treatment, until glycogen stores are repleted and plasma glucose concentrations are stable. See Chapter 26 for a discussion of hypoglycaemia in neonates and children. Investigation of adult hypoglycaemia Some of the causes of hypoglycaemia are shown in Box 12.1 and can be divided into hyperinsulinaemic and hypoinsulinaemic groups. The following scheme may be useful in investigating hypoglycaemia. It is important to exclude pseudohypoglycaemia due to in vitro glucose metabolism, for example an old blood sample or one not collected into fluoride oxalate anticoagulant. Sometimes a cause may be evident from the medical and drug histories and clinical examination. One of the most important tests in a patient with proven hypoglycaemia is to measure the plasma insulin and C-peptide concentrations when the plasma glucose concentration is low. Plasma for these assays should be separated from cells immediately and the plasma stored at –20°C until hypoglycaemia has been proven. These tests should differentiate exogenous insulin administration and endogenous insulin production, for example an insulinoma, from other causes of hypoglycaemia. Raised plasma insulin concentrations and suppressed plasma concentrations of C-peptide suggest exogenous insulin administration (hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia). Conversely, a high plasma insulin CASE 4 A 45-year-old woman was being investigated in the endocrine unit because of hypoglycaemic episodes, which manifested as sweating and dizzy attacks and which were relieved by sweet drinks. Her renal, liver and thyroid functions were all normal. Some of her fasting biochemical results were as follows: Plasma Glucose 2.1 mmol/L (5.5–11.1) Insulin 168 pmol/L (10–50) Insulin C-peptide 998 pmol/L (200–650) A urinary sulphonylurea screen was negative. DISCUSSION This patient has raised plasma insulin concentrations in the presence of fasting hypoglycaemia. She was subsequently shown to have an insulinoma. Note the raised plasma insulin and C-peptide concentrations in the presence of hypoglycaemia, suggesting the presence of endogenous insulin secretion (exogenous insulin administration would not be expected to be associated with raised C-peptide concentrations). Her symptoms and their relief by glucose-containing drinks are classic indicators of hypoglycaemic episodes. Insulinomas can be associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndrome, which should be excluded.