may increase the risk of heart failure (hazard ratio 1.27 found in a post­marketing study). In a large postmarketing study, alogliptin, was associated with a slightly increased rate of heart failure. The FDA has issued a warning that the DPP­4 inhibitors can occasionally cause joint pains that resolve after stopping the drug. SODIUM­GLUCOSE CO­TRANSPORTER 2 (SGLT2) INHIBITORS Glucose is freely filtered by the renal glomeruli and is reabsorbed in the proximal tubules by the action of sodium­glucose transporters (SGLTs). Sodium­glucose transporter 2 (SGLT2) accounts for 90% of glucose reabsorption, and its inhibition causes glycosuria and lowers glucose levels in patients with type 2 diabetes. The SGLT2 inhibitors canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, empagliflozin, and ertugliflozin are approved for clinical use in the United States. These agents reduce the threshold for glycosuria from a plasma glucose threshold of ∼180 mg/dL to ∼40 mg/dL, and lower HbA1c by 0.5–1% when used alone or in combination with other oral agents or insulin. The efficacy is greater at higher HbA1c levels when more glucose is excreted as a result of SGLT2 inhibition. The loss of calories results in modest weight loss of 2–5 kg. The usual dose of canagliflozin is 100 mg daily but up to 300 mg daily can be used in patients with normal kidney function. The dose of dapagliflozin is 10 mg daily but 5 mg daily is the recommended initial dose in patients with hepatic failure. The usual dose of empagliflozin is 10 mg daily but a higher dose of 25 mg daily can be used. The recommended starting dose of ertugliflozin is 5 mg but the dose can be increased to 15 mg daily if additional glucose lowering is needed. In a large postmarketing study of patients with type 2 diabetes with known cardiovascular disease, the addition of empagliflozin was associated with a significantly lower primary composite outcome of death from cardiovascular causes, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke. The mechanisms regarding the benefit remain unclear. Weight loss, lower blood pressure, and diuresis may have played a role since there were fewer deaths from heart failure in the treated group, whereas the rates of myocardial infarction were unaltered. A similar large multinational study was performed with canagliflozin in patients with type 2 diabetes with known or increased risk for cardiovascular disease. The canagliflozin­treated group had a lower primary composite outcome of death from cardiovascular causes, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke (hazard ratio 0.86, P = 0.02). In a heart failure study of 4744 patients with NYHA class II, III, IV heart failure and ejection fraction of <40%, dapagliflozin reduced the cumulative incidence of worsening heart failure or cardiovascular death (hazard ratio, 0.74; p <0.001). In all, 42% of the patients had diabetes; the findings in patients with and without diabetes were the same. The SGLT2 inhibitors have also shown benefit in reducing the progression of albuminuria. In a study of patients with type 2 diabetes with stage 2 to 3 chronic kidney disease (eGFR 30 to less than 90 mg/kg/1.73 m2) and urine albumin excretion ranging from 300–5000 mcg albumin/g creatinine, and on an ACE inhibitor or ARB, canagliflozin reduced the risk of end stage renal disease, the risk of doubling of serum creatinine, and the risk of renal death. In a multinational study of 4304 patients with chronic kidney disease, dapagliflozin reduced the risk of end­stage renal disease or death from renal and cardiovascular causes. A third of the patients in the study did not have diabetes and had benefit. As might be expected, the efficacy of the SGLT2 inhibitors is reduced in chronic kidney disease. They can also increase creatinine and decrease eGFR, especially in patients with kidney impairment. Their use is generally not recommended in patients with eGFR less than 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 (for glycemic control) and are contraindicated in patients with eGFR less than 30 mL/min/1.73 m2. The study of dapagliflozin in chronic kidney disease noted that the drug was safe and beneficial in patients with eGFR as low as 25 mL/min/1.73 m2 (for the renal benefits). The major adverse effects are increased incidence of genital mycotic infections and urinary tract infections affecting ∼8–9% of patients. There have also been reports of cases of pyelonephritis and septicemia requiring hospitalization. Cases of necrotizing fasciitis of the perineum (Fournier gangrene) have been reported. The glycosuria can cause intravascular volume contraction and hypotension. Canagliflozin and empagliflozin caused a modest increase in LDL cholesterol levels (4–8%). In clinical trials patients taking dapagliflozin had higher rates of breast cancer (nine cases versus none in comparator arms) and bladder cancer (nine cases versus one in placebo arm). These cancer rates exceeded the expected rates in an age­matched reference diabetes population. Canagliflozin has been reported to cause a decrease in bone mineral density at the lumbar spine and the hip. In a pooled analysis of eight clinical trials (mean duration 68 weeks), an increase in fractures by about 30% was observed in patients on canagliflozin. It is likely that the effect on the bones is a class effect and not restricted to canagliflozin. A modest increase in upper limb fractures was observed with canagliflozin therapy. It is not known if this is due to an effect on bone strength or related to falls due to hypotension. One multinational study of canagliflozin showed an increase in risk of amputations, especially of the toes. This finding has not been observed in other studies using this drug or with the other SGLT2 inhibitors.