involved olfactory stimulants, in which the goal was to se- lect chemicals that had a musk odor. A group of 300 unique compounds was selected from a group of odorants that in- cluded 60 musk odorants plus 49 camphor, 44 floral, 32 ethereal, 41 mint, 51 pungent, and 23 putrid odorants. Initially, 68 descriptors were evaluated. Depending on the approach, the number of descriptors was reduced to 11 to 16, consisting mostly of bond types. Using this small num- ber, the 60 musk odorants could be selected from the re- maining 240 compounds, with an accuracy of 95% to 97%. The use of classification techniques in medicinal chem- istry has matured over years of general use. The types of de- scriptors have expanded to spatial measurements in 3D space similar to those used in 3D-QSAR (see discussion that follows). Increasingly, databases of existing compounds are scanned for molecules that possess what appear to be the de- sired parameters. If the scan is successful, compounds that are predicted to be active provide the starting point for syn- thesizing new compounds for testing. One can see parallels between the search of chemical databases and screening plant, animal, and microbial sources for new compounds. Although the statistical and pattern recognition methodolo- gies have been in use for a very long time, there still needs to be considerable research into their proper use, and further testing of their predictive power is needed. The goal of scan- ning databases of already synthesized compounds to select compounds for pharmacological evaluation will require considerable additional development of the various multi- variate techniques. This chapter is limited to fairly simple computational tech- niques using readily available, low-cost software. The QSAR approach, including classification methods has at its disposal literally thousands of different descriptors, each with its advo- cates, and many computational approaches starting with the previously discussed linear regression to neural networks, de- cision trees and support vector machines. Thus, it is fair to ask if drug discoveries have been made with these computational techniques. The answer is in the ambiguous yes-and-no cate- gory depending on who is asked. There is general agreement that QSAR provided the foundation to better understand the relationship between chemical space and pharmacological space. Consider these two pairs of active molecules. For clas- sification purposes, acetylcholine and nicotine are nicotinic agonists, and dopamine and pergolide are dopaminergic ago- nists. Using the various measures of similarity and their de- scriptors, fingerprints, and fragments, these two pairs come up as dissimilar. It is true that the pharmacological profiles of acetylcholine—nicotine and dopamine—pergolide vary so much that nicotine is not used as a nicotinic agonist and pergolide is falling into disuse.9,10 Without being trite, com- putational drug design techniques are not going to replace the medicinal chemist who has an open, inquiring mind. Has QSAR Been Successful? The answer to this question depends on what are the expec- tations.11 In their original development, it was hoped that QSAR equations would lead to commercially successful drugs. This has not occurred. Over the years, methodologies to develop these equations have changed. In the early devel- opment of QSAR equations, all of the compounds in a data set were used followed by random holding out of com- pounds to see if the equation changed. If there are enough compounds, it is now more common to begin with a train- ing set and evaluate its validity with a test set. This has led to recommendations on the most reliable statistical measure- ments of validity.12–14 Paralleling the evolution in the use of different statistical measures of validity, deriving these equations has lead to the development of a wide variety of descriptors ranging from descriptive, physicochemical and topological. What can be frustrating is that the quality of predictions is dependent on the descriptor set.15 It must be remembered that most of de- scriptors are only as good as the algorithms used to calculate them. Further, it can be difficult to interpret exactly what the descriptors are measuring in chemical space. QSAR equa- tions must explain physical reality if predictions for future compounds are to be made.16 24 Wilson and Gisvold’s Textbook of Organic Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry