ChApTER 44 Micronutrients: Vitamins & Minerals 547 deficiency or is at risk of toxicity. If it is assumed that indi- vidual requirements are distributed in a statistically normal fashion around the observed mean requirement, then a range of ±2 × the standard deviation (SD) around the mean includes the requirements of 95% of the population. Reference or rec- ommended intakes are therefore set at the average require- ment plus 2 × SD, and so meet or exceed the requirements of 97.5% of the population. Reference and recommended intakes of vitamins and minerals published by different national and international authorities (Tables 44–1 to 44–4) differ because of different interpretations of the available data, and the availability of new experimental data in more recent publications. THE VITAMINS ARE A DISPARATE GROUP OF COMPOUNDS WITH A VARIETY OF METABOLIC FUNCTIONS A vitamin is defined as an organic compound that is required in the diet in small amounts for the maintenance of normal metabolic integrity. Deficiency causes a specific disease, which is cured or prevented only by restoring the vitamin to the diet (Table 44–5). However, vitamin D, which is formed in the skin from 7-dehydrocholesterol on exposure to sunlight, and niacin, which can be formed from the essential amino acid tryptophan, do not strictly comply with this definition. LIPID-SOLUBLE VITAMINS TWO GROUPS OF COMPOUNDS HAVE VITAMIN A ACTIVITY Retinoids comprise retinol, retinaldehyde, and retinoic acid (preformed vitamin A, found only in foods of animal origin); carotenoids, found in plants, are composed of carotenes and related compounds; many are precursors of vitamin A, as they can be cleaved to yield retinaldehyde, then retinol and retinoic acid (Figure 44–1). The α-, β-, and γ-carotenes and crypto- xanthin are quantitatively the most important provitamin A carotenoids. β-Carotene and other provitamin A carotenoids are cleaved in the intestinal mucosa by carotene dioxygenase, yielding retinaldehyde, which is reduced to retinol, esterified and secreted in chylomicrons together with esters formed from dietary retinol. The intestinal activity of carotene dioxy- genase is low, so that a relatively large proportion of ingested β-carotene may appear in the circulation unchanged. There are two isoenzymes of carotene dioxygenase. One catalyzes cleavage of the central bond of β-carotene; the other catalyzes asymmetric cleavage leading to the formation of 8′-, 10′-, and 12′-apo-carotenals, which are oxidized to retinoic acid, but cannot be used as sources of retinol or retinaldehyde. Although it would appear that one molecule of β-carotene should yield two of retinol, this is not so in practice; 6 μg of β-carotene is equivalent to 1 μg of preformed retinol. The total amount of vitamin A in foods is therefore expressed as micro- grams of retinol equivalents = μg preformed vitamin A + 1/6 × μg β-carotene + 1/12 × μg other provitamin A carotenoids. Before pure vitamin A was available for chemical analysis, the vitamin A content of foods was determined by biological assay and the results expressed as international units (IU). 1 IU = 0.3 μg retinol; 1 μg retinol = 3.33 IU. Although obsolete, IU is sometimes still used in food labeling. In 2001, The USA/ Canadian Dietary Reference Values report introduced the term retinol activity equivalent to take account of the incom- plete absorption and metabolism of carotenoids; 1 RAE = 1 μg all-trans-retinol, 12 μg β-carotene, 24 μg α-carotene or β-cryptoxanthin. On this basis, 1 IU of vitamin A activity is equal to 3.6 μg β-carotene or 7.2 μg of other provitamin A carotenoids. Vitamin A has a Function in Vision In the retina, retinaldehyde functions as the prosthetic group of the light-sensitive opsin proteins, forming rhodopsin (in rods) and iodopsin (in cones). Any one cone cell contains only one type of opsin and is sensitive to only one color. In the pig- ment epithelium of the retina, all-trans-retinol is isomerized to 11-cis-retinol and oxidized to 11-cis-retinaldehyde. This reacts with a lysine residue in opsin, forming the holo-protein rhodopsin. As shown in Figure 44–2, the absorption of light by rhodopsin causes isomerization of the retinaldehyde from 11-cis to all-trans, and a conformational change in opsin. This results in the release of retinaldehyde from the protein, and the initiation of a nerve impulse. The formation of the initial excited form of rhodopsin, bathorhodopsin, occurs within picoseconds of illumination. There is then a series of conforma- tional changes leading to the formation of metarhodopsin II, which initiates a guanine nucleotide amplification cascade and then a nerve impulse. The final step is hydrolysis to release all-trans-retinaldehyde and opsin. The key to initiation of the visual cycle is the availability of 11-cis-retinaldehyde, and hence vitamin A. In deficiency, both the time taken to adapt to darkness and the ability to see in poor light are impaired. Retinoic Acid has a Role in the Regulation of Gene Expression and Tissue Differentiation A major role of vitamin A is in the control of cell differen- tiation and turnover. All-trans-retinoic acid and 9-cis-retinoic acid (Figure 44–1) regulate growth, development, and tissue differentiation; they have different actions in different tissues. Like the thyroid and steroid hormones and vitamin D, retinoic acid binds to nuclear receptors that bind to response elements of DNA and regulate the transcription of specific genes. There are two families of nuclear retinoid receptors: the retinoic acid receptors (RAR) bind all-trans-retinoic acid or 9-cis-retinoic acid, and the retinoid X receptors (RXR) bind 9-cis-retinoic Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library