The calcium channel blockers are orally active agents and are characterized by high first­pass effect, high plasma protein binding, and extensive metabolism. Verapamil and diltiazem are also used by the intravenous route. Pharmacodynamics A. Mechanism of Action The voltage­gated L type is the dominant type of calcium channel in cardiac and smooth muscle and is known to contain several drug receptors. It consists of α1 (the larger, pore­forming subunit), α2, β, γ, and δ subunits. Four variant α1 subunits have been recognized. Nifedipine and other dihydropyridines have been demonstrated to bind to one site on the α1 subunit, whereas verapamil and diltiazem appear to bind to closely related but not identical receptors in another region of the same subunit. Binding of a drug to the verapamil or diltiazem receptors allosterically affects dihydropyridine binding. These receptor regions are stereoselective, since marked differences in both stereoisomer­binding affinity and pharmacologic potency are observed for enantiomers of verapamil, diltiazem, and optically active nifedipine congeners. Blockade of calcium channels by these drugs resembles that of sodium channel blockade by local anesthetics (see Chapters 14 and 26). The drugs act from the inner side of the membrane and bind more effectively to open channels and inactivated channels. Binding of the drug reduces the frequency of opening in response to depolarization. The result is a marked decrease in transmembrane calcium current, which in smooth muscle results in long­ lasting relaxation (see Figure 12–3) and in cardiac muscle results in reduction in contractility throughout the heart and decreases in sinus node pacemaker rate and atrioventricular node conduction velocity.* Although some neuronal cells harbor L­type calcium channels, their sensitivity to these drugs is lower because the channels in these cells spend less time in the open and inactivated states. Smooth muscle responses to calcium influx through ligand­gated calcium channels are also reduced by these drugs but not as markedly. The block can be partially reversed by elevating the concentration of calcium, although the levels of calcium required are not easily attainable in patients. Block can also be partially reversed by the use of drugs that increase the transmembrane flux of calcium, such as sympathomimetics. Other types of calcium channels are less sensitive to blockade by these calcium channel blockers (see Table 12–4). Therefore, tissues in which these other channel types play a major role—neurons and most secretory glands—are much less affected by these drugs than are cardiac and smooth muscle. Mibefradil is a selective T­type calcium channel blocker that was introduced for antiarrhythmic use but has been withdrawn. Ion channels other than calcium channels are much less sensitive to these drugs. Potassium channels in vascular smooth muscle are inhibited by verapamil, thus limiting the vasodilation produced by this drug. Sodium channels as well as calcium channels are blocked by bepridil, an obsolete antiarrhythmic drug. B. Organ System Effects 1. Smooth muscle Most types of smooth muscle are dependent on transmembrane calcium influx for normal resting tone and contractile responses These cells are