A simplified energy diagram for the hydrocarbon bu- tane is shown in Figure 2.19. It illustrates that the energy rises and falls during rotation around the central Csp3–Csp3 bond as a function of the relative positions of the methyl groups. The peaks on the curve correspond to energy maxima, whereas the valleys correspond to energy min- ima. For butane, there are two different types of minima: one is for the anti butane conformation and the other two correspond to the gauche butane conformations. The anti conformation is the global minimum, meaning it has the absolute lowest energy of the three possible low-energy conformations. The differences in the conformational en- ergies cannot be attributed to steric interactions alone. Structures with more than one rotatable bond have multi- ple minima available. Knowing the permissible conforma- tions available to druglike molecules is important for design purposes. A more typical energy diagram is shown in Figure 2.20. Notice that some of the minima are nearly equivalent, and it is easy to move from one minimum to another. From energy diagrams alone, it is difficult to answer the question, which of the ligand’s low or moderately low conformations fits onto the receptor? This question can be answered partially by assuming that lower-energy conformations are more highly populated and thus more likely to interact with the re- ceptor. Nevertheless, specific interactions such as hydrogen bond formation and dipole–dipole interactions can affect the energy levels of different conformations. Therefore, the bound conformation of a drug is seldom its lowest-energy conformation. Because looking solely at the molecule can lead to am- biguous conclusions regarding the conformation when docking at the receptor, this has lead to calculating confor- mations of the macromolecule that is the receptor and visualizing the results. A capability that today’s graphics software is representing molecular structures in many different ways, depending on the properties one decides to highlight. Dorzolamide is a good example of a drug that involved computer-aided drug design (CADD) methods in its development.22 Figure 2.21 shows a standard represen- tation of dorzolamide from a molecular modeling software package. The atoms can be color coded in various ways according to the different properties that one might want to highlight. As noted previously, however, it is important to know the size and shape of the molecule. Various representations are possible. A convenient visualization technique is to have the atoms and bonds displayed simul- taneously with the van der Waals surface represented by an even distribution of dots. These dot surfaces are con- venient, in that the atomic connectivity is shown along with the appropriate size and shape of the molecular surface. As computer graphics technology has improved, it has become possible to represent the surface as a translucent volume, shown in Figure 2.22, in which the 34 Wilson and Gisvold’s Textbook of Organic Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry Figure 2.21 A computer-generated representation of dorzolamide. The structure has been energy minimized using Spartan ‘08. Figure 2.19 Potential energy for butane. The energy (kcal/mol) is plotted on the y-axis versus the torsion angle Csp3-Csp3-Csp3-Csp3, which is plotted on the x-axis. There are three minima. The two gauche conformers are higher in energy that the anti conformer by approxi- mately 0.9 kcal/mol. Figure 2.20 Diagram showing the energy maxima and minima as two substituted carbons connected by a single bond are rotated 360 degrees relative to each other.