112 SECTION 2 | Cardiovascular Disorders sometimes combined with traditional inotropes so each drug can be adjusted inde- pendently to achieve the desired hemodynamic response, although little data exist to support that practice. ✓ Norepinephrine stimulates α1- and β1-adrenergic receptors. Stimulation of β1- receptors in myocardial tissue increases HR, contractility, and therefore CO, but peripheral α1-receptor-induced vasoconstriction is the predominant clinical hemodynamic effect. Lack of affinity for β2-receptors may be responsible for the limited impact of norepinephrine on CO. ✓ Dopamine is an endogenous precursor of norepinephrine that stimulates α1, β1, β2, and D1 (vascular dopaminergic) receptors. Positive inotropic effects mediated primarily by β1-receptors are prominent with doses of 2–5 mcg/kg/min. The CI is increased with minimal changes in SVR. At doses between 5 and 10 mcg/kg/ min, chronotropic and α1-mediated vasoconstriction become more prominent and MAP usually increases as a result of increases in both CI and SVR. ✓ Administration of low doses of dopamine (ie, 2 –5 mcg/kg/min), does not consis- tently improve congestive symptoms or diuresis but increases the risk of tachyar- rhythmias. Because of β -mediated effects at lower infusion rates, dopamine likely does not provide any advantages over a traditional inotrope in this setting. EVALUATION OF THERAPEUTIC OUTCOMES CHRONIC HEART FAILURE • Ask patients about the presence and severity of symptoms and how symptoms affect daily activities. • Evaluate efficacy of diuretic treatment by disappearance of the signs and symptoms of excess fluid retention. Focus the physical examination on body weight, extent of JVD, presence of HJR, and presence and severity of pulmonary congestion (crackles, dyspnea on exertion, orthopnea, and PND) and peripheral edema. • Other outcomes are improvement in exercise tolerance and fatigue, decreased noc- turia, and decreased HR. • Monitor BP to ensure that symptomatic hypotension does not develop as a result of drug therapy. • Body weight is a sensitive marker of fluid loss or retention, and patients should weigh themselves daily and report changes of 3–5 lb (1.4–2.3 kg) to their healthcare pro- vider so adjustments can be made in diuretic doses. • Symptoms may worsen initially on β-blocker therapy, and it may take weeks to months before patients notice symptomatic improvement. • Routine monitoring of serum electrolytes (especially potassium and magnesium) and renal function (BUN, serum creatinine, eGFR) is mandatory in patients with HF. ACUTE DECOMPENSATED HEART FAILURE • Assess the efficacy of drug therapy with daily monitoring of weight, strict fluid intake and output measurements, and HF signs/symptoms. Monitor frequently for electro- lyte depletion, symptomatic hypotension, and renal dysfunction. Assess vital signs frequently throughout the day. • Patients should not be discharged until optimal volume status is achieved, they have been successfully transitioned from IV to oral diuretics, and IV inotropes and vaso- dilators have been discontinued for at least 24 hours. • Optimize GDMT in hemodynamically stable patients without contraindications, including reinitiation of therapies withheld earlier in the admission. Low-dose β-blockers may be safely initiated at discharge without increasing the risk of read- mission. Transitioning eligible patients to the ARNI sacubitril/valsartan may also be considered.