Verapamil has been shown to block the P­glycoprotein responsible for the transport of many foreign drugs out of cancer (and other) cells (see Chapter 1); other calcium channel blockers appear to have a similar effect. This action is not stereoselective. Verapamil has been shown to partially reverse the resistance of cancer cells to many chemotherapeutic drugs in vitro. Some clinical results suggest similar effects in patients (see Chapter 54). Animal research suggests possible future roles of calcium blockers in the treatment of osteoporosis, fertility disorders and male contraception, immune modulation, and even schistosomiasis. Verapamil does not appear to block transmembrane divalent metal ion transporters such as DMT1. Toxicity The most important toxic effects reported for calcium channel blockers are direct extensions of their therapeutic action. Excessive inhibition of calcium influx can cause serious cardiac depression, including bradycardia, atrioventricular block, cardiac arrest, and heart failure. These effects have been rare in clinical use. Retrospective case­control studies reported that prompt­release nifedipine increased the risk of myocardial infarction in patients with hypertension. Slow­release and long­acting dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers are usually well tolerated. However, dihydropyridines, compared with angiotensin­converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, have been reported to increase the risk of adverse cardiac events in patients with hypertension with or without diabetes. These results suggest that relatively short­acting calcium channel blockers such as prompt­release nifedipine have the potential to enhance the risk of adverse cardiac events and should be avoided. Patients receiving β­blocking drugs are more sensitive to the cardiodepressant effects of calcium channel blockers. Minor toxicities (troublesome but not usually requiring discontinuance of therapy) include flushing, dizziness, nausea, constipation, and peripheral edema. Constipation is particularly common with verapamil. Mechanisms of Clinical Effects Calcium channel blockers decrease myocardial contractile force, which reduces myocardial oxygen requirements. Calcium channel block in arterial smooth muscle decreases arterial and intraventricular pressure. Some of these drugs (eg, verapamil, diltiazem) also possess a nonspecific antiadrenergic effect, which may contribute to peripheral vasodilation. As a result of all of these effects, left ventricular wall stress declines, which reduces myocardial oxygen requirements. Decreased heart rate with the use of verapamil or diltiazem causes a further decrease in myocardial oxygen demand. Calcium channel­blocking agents also relieve and prevent focal coronary artery spasm in variant angina. Use of these agents has thus emerged as the most effective prophylactic treatment for this form of angina pectoris. Sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodal tissues, which are mainly composed of calcium­dependent, slow­response cells, are affected markedly by verapamil, moderately by diltiazem, and much less by dihydropyridines. Thus, verapamil and diltiazem decrease atrioventricular nodal conduction and are often effective in the management of supraventricular reentry tachycardia and in decreasing ventricular rate in atrial fibrillation or flutter. Nifedipine does not affect atrioventricular conduction. Nonspecific sympathetic antagonism is most marked with diltiazem and much less with verapamil. Nifedipine does not appear to have this effect, probably because reflex tachycardia in response to hypotension occurs most frequently with nifedipine and much less so with diltiazem and verapamil. These differences in pharmacologic effects should be considered in selecting calcium channel­blocking agents for the management of angina. Special Coronary Vasodilators Many vasodilators can be shown to increase coronary flow in the absence of atherosclerotic disease. These include dipyridamole and adenosine. In fact, dipyridamole is an extremely effective coronary dilator, but it is not effective in angina because of coronary steal (see below). Adenosine, the naturally occurring nucleoside, acts on specific membrane­bound receptors, including at least four subtypes (A1, A2A, A2B, and A3). Adenosine, acting on A2A receptors, causes a very brief but marked dilation of the coronary resistance vessels and has been used as a drug to measure maximum coronary flow (fractional flow reserve, FFR) in patients with coronary disease. The drug also markedly slows or blocks atrioventricular (AV) conduction in the heart and is used to convert AV nodal tachycardias to normal sinus rhythm (see Chapter 14). Regadenoson is a selective A2A agonist and has been developed for use in stress testing in suspected coronary artery disease and for imaging the coronary circulation. It appears to have a better benefit­to­risk ratio than adenosine in these applications. Similar A2A agonists (binodenoson, apadenoson) are investigational. Adenosine receptor ligands are also under investigation for anti­inflammatory and antinociceptive and other neurological applications.