564 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS is that they do not require removal after release of all the drug. Liquid-gel/solid implants are initially liquid formu­ lations comprising a polymer, active drug, and solvent (either aqueous or organic). After administration, a gel or a solid polymeric matrix is formed trapping the drug and extending the release of the drug for days or months. Metal/plastic implants may be formulated from tita­ nium or other suitable materials and are administered by an injector or surgical installation. A solution of the drug, located inside the implant, is released via an osmotically driven pump inside the implant and may last as long as 1 year or more; release follows zero order. Drug-eluting stents combine the mechanical effect of the stent with a prolonged pharmacologic effect of the incorpo­ rated drug. The metal stent can be coated with a nonbiode­ gradable or biodegradable polymer-containing drug. Historically, pellets or implants were sterile, small, usu­ ally cylindrical solid objects about 3.2 mm in diameter and 8 mm long, prepared by compression and intended to be implanted subcutaneously to provide continuous release of medication over time. The pellets that are implanted under the skin (usually of the thigh or abdomen) with a special injector or by surgical incision are used for potent hormones. Implantation provides the patient with an economical means of obtaining long-lasting effects (up to many months after a single implantation) and obviates fre­ quent parenteral or oral hormone therapy. The implanted pellets, which may contain 100 times the amount of drug (e.g., desoxycorticosterone, estradiol, testosterone) given by other routes of administration, release the drug slowly into the general circulation. Pellets were formulated with no binders, diluents, or excipients, to permit total dissolution and absorption of the pellet from the site of implantation. Recently, a levo­ norgestrel implant contraceptive system was developed. Rather than dissolve entirely, the surgically implanted capsules are intended to be removed by surgery after an appropriate amount of time (up to 5 years). Levonorgestrel Implants Levonorgestrel implants are a set of six flexible closed cap­ sules of a dimethylsiloxane-methyl vinyl siloxane copoly­ mer, each containing 36 mg of the progestin (16). They are found in an insertion kit to facilitate subdermal implanta­ tion through a 2-mm incision in the mid-upper arm about 8 to 10 cm above the elbow crease. They are implanted in a fanlike pattern about 15 degrees apart for a total of 75 degrees. Appropriate insertion facilitates removal by the end of the 5th year. This system provides long-term (up to 5 years) reversible contraception. Diffusion of the levonorgestrel through the wall of each capsule provides a continuous low dose of proges­ tin. Initially, the dose of levonorgestrel is about 85 mg/ d, declining to about 50 mg/ d by 9 months, about 35 mg/ d by 18 months, and thereafter to about 30 mg/ d. The result­ ing blood levels are substantially below those generally FIGURE 20.12. Gliadel wafer (polifeprosan 20 with carmus­ tine implant) and packaging components. (Courtesy of Guilford Pharmaceuticals.) observed among users of combination oral contraceptives containing the progestins norgestrel and levonorgestrel. Because of the range of blood levels and variation in indi­ vidual response, blood levels alone are not predictive of the risk of pregnancy in an individual woman (17). Gliadel Wafer Implant Polifeprosan 20 with carmustine implant (Gliadel Wafer), shown in Figures 20.12 to 20.14, is a sterile off-white to pale yellow wafer approximately 1.45 cm in diameter and 1 mm thick. Each wafer contains 192.3 mg of a biodegrad­ able polyanhydride copolymer and 7. 7 mg of carmustine. Polifeprosan 20 consists of poly[bis(p-carboxyphenoxy) propane-sebacic acid] in a 20:80 molar ratio and is used to control the local delivery of carmustine, which is distrib­ uted uniformly throughout the copolymer matrix. Gliadel is designed to deliver the carmustine directly into the surgical cavity created when a brain tumor is resected, with numerous wafers being used depending upon the desired dose. When exposed to the aqueous environment in the resection cavity, the anhydride bonds in the copolymer are hydrolyzed, releasing the carmustine, carboxyphenoxypropane, and sebacic acid. The active drug, carmustine, is released from the wafer and diffuses into the surrounding brain tissue, producing an antineo­ plastic effect by alkylating DNA and RNA. In 3 weeks, more than 70% of the copolymer degrades, with carboxyphenoxypropane being eliminated by the kidney and sebacic acid being metabolized by the liver and expired as carbon dioxide. Each wafer contains 7.7 mg of carmustine, and when eight wafers ( the recommended dose) are used, a dose of 61.6 mg is delivered. The wafers are supplied in a single­ dose treatment box containing eight individually pouched wafers. Each wafer is double-pouched in foil. The inner pouch is sterile; upon removing the outer foil pouch in an