A parallel system for angiotensin generation exists in several other tissues (eg, heart) and may be responsible for trophic changes such as cardiac hypertrophy. The converting enzyme involved in tissue angiotensin II synthesis is also inhibited by ACE inhibitors. Three currently marketed classes of drugs act specifically on the renin­angiotensin system: ACE inhibitors; the competitive inhibitors of angiotensin at its receptors (angiotensin receptor blockers or ARBs), including losartan and other nonpeptide antagonists; and aliskiren, an orally active renin antagonist (see Chapter 17). A fourth group of drugs, the aldosterone receptor inhibitors (eg, spironolactone, eplerenone), is discussed with the diuretics. In addition, β blockers, as noted earlier, can reduce renin secretion. The experimental drug firibastat inhibits brain aminopeptidase and has been shown to lower blood pressure in hypertensive overweight patients. ANGIOTENSIN­CONVERTING ENZYME (ACE) INHIBITORS Captopril and other drugs in this class inhibit the converting enzyme peptidyl dipeptidase that hydrolyzes angiotensin I to angiotensin II and (under the name plasma kininase) inactivates bradykinin, a potent vasodilator that works at least in part by stimulating release of nitric oxide and prostacyclin. The hypotensive activity of captopril results from both an inhibitory action on the renin­angiotensin system and a stimulating action on the kallikrein­ kinin system (see Figure 11–5). The latter mechanism has been demonstrated by showing that a bradykinin receptor antagonist, icatibant (see Chapter 17), blunts the blood pressure–lowering effect of captopril. Enalapril is an oral prodrug that is converted by hydrolysis to a converting enzyme inhibitor, enalaprilat, with effects similar to those of captopril. Enalaprilat itself is available only for intravenous use, primarily for hypertensive emergencies. Lisinopril is a lysine derivative of enalaprilat. Benazepril, fosinopril, lisinopril, moexipril, perindopril, quinapril, ramipril, and trandolapril are other long­acting members of the class. All except lisinopril are prodrugs, like enalapril, and are converted to the active agents by hydrolysis, primarily in the liver. Angiotensin II inhibitors lower blood pressure principally by decreasing peripheral vascular resistance. Cardiac output and heart rate are not significantly changed. Unlike direct vasodilators, these agents do not result in reflex sympathetic activation and can be used safely in persons with ischemic heart disease. The absence of reflex tachycardia may be due to downward resetting of the baroreceptors or to enhanced parasympathetic activity. Although converting enzyme inhibitors are most effective in conditions associated with high plasma renin activity, there is no good correlation among subjects between plasma renin activity and antihypertensive response. Accordingly, renin profiling is unnecessary. ACE inhibitors have a particularly useful role in treating patients with chronic kidney disease because they diminish proteinuria and stabilize renal