5. Insulin icodec This is a basal insulin analog that is given once a week. The lysine at B29 of the insulin is conjugated to 1,20­icosanedioic acid (C20). There are three aminoacid substitutions (A14E, B16H and B25H). The C20 diacid group results in strong, reversible binding to albumin thus delaying SC absorption, and the amino acid substitutions attenuate insulin receptor affinity and increase resistance to degradation. 6. Mixtures of insulins Because intermediate­acting NPH insulins require several hours to reach adequate therapeutic levels, their use in patients with diabetes usually requires supplements of rapid­ or short­acting insulin before meals. For convenience, these can be mixed together in the same syringe before injection. The regular insulin or rapidly acting insulin analog is withdrawn first, then the NPH insulin, and then the mixture is injected immediately. Stable premixed insulins (70% NPH and 30% regular) are available as a convenience to patients who have difficulty mixing insulin because of visual problems or insufficient manual dexterity. Premixed preparations of rapidly acting insulin analogs (lispro, aspart) and NPH are not stable because of exchange of the rapidly acting insulin analog for the human regular insulin in the protamine complex. Consequently, over time, the soluble component becomes a mixture of regular and rapidly acting insulin analog at varying ratios. To remedy this problem, intermediate insulins composed of isophane complexes of protamine with the rapidly acting insulin analogs were developed (neutral protamine lispro [NPL]; aspart protamine). Premixed combinations of NPL and insulin lispro are now available for clinical use (Humalog Mix 75/25 and Humalog Mix 50/50). These mixtures have a more rapid onset of glucose­lowering activity compared with 70% NPH/30% regular human insulin mixture and can be given within 15 minutes before or after starting a meal. A similar 70% insulin aspart protamine/30% insulin aspart (NovoLog Mix 70/30) is now available. The main advantages of these new mixtures are that (1) they can be given within 15 minutes of starting a meal and (2) they are more effective in achieving glucose targets with the postprandial glucose rise after a carbohydrate­rich meal.Insulin glargine and insulin detemir cannot be mixed in the same syringe with other insulins. Insulin Delivery Systems A. Insulin Syringes and Needles Disposable plastic syringes with needles attached are available in 1­mL (100 units), 0.5­mL (50 units), and 0.3­mL (30 units) sizes. The “low­dose” 0.3­ mL syringes are popular because many patients with diabetes do not take more than 30 units of insulin in a single injection and the markings are easier to read. They are also available in half­unit markings. Three lengths of needles are available; longer needles are preferable in overweight/obese patients to ensure insulin absorption. If the skin is clean, it is not necessary to use alcohol. Rotation of sites is recommended to avoid problems with absorption due to lipohypertrophy from overuse of injection sites. B . Insulin Pens The pens eliminate the need for carrying insulin vials and syringes. Cartridges of insulin aspart and lispro are available for reusable pens (Novo Nordisk, Medtronic, and Owen Mumford). Smart pens are available that pair with the patient’s smart phone and help the patient calculate doses and keep track of the injections. Disposable prefilled pens are also available for regular insulin (U100, U500), insulin lispro, insulin aspart, insulin glulisine, insulin detemir, insulin glargine, insulin degludec, NPH, 70% NPH/30% regular, 75% NPL/25% insulin lispro, 50% NPL/50% insulin lispro, 70% insulin aspart protamine/30% insulin aspart, and 70% insulin degludec/30% insulin aspart (Table 41–6). C. Continuous Subcutaneous Insulin Infusion Devices (CSII, Insulin Pumps) In the United States, Medtronic MiniMed, Insulet, and Tandem make battery­operated pumps for continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII). The externally worn pumps are about the size of a pager and they deliver short­acting insulin throughout the day and night. The catheter connecting the insulin reservoir to the subcutaneous cannula can be disconnected, allowing the patient to remove the pump temporarily (eg, for bathing). Omnipod (Insulet Corporation) is a disposable waterproof electronic patch pump in which the insulin reservoir and infusion set are integrated into one unit (pod), so there is no catheter. The pod, placed on the skin, delivers subcutaneous basal and bolus insulin based on wirelessly transmitted instructions from a personal digital assistant. A major advantage of an insulin pump is that it allows for establishment of a basal profile tailored to the patient allowing for better overnight, between­ l l t l d t f l i i th t ith i S ft i t th ti t i l l ti b l b d