562 SECTIOn Ix Special Topics (A) enzyme, peptidylglycine hydroxylase, which, again, requires ascorbate for reduction of Cu2+. A number of iron-containing, ascorbate-requiring hydrox- ylases share a common reaction mechanism, in which hydrox- ylation of the substrate is linked to oxidative decarboxylation of α-ketoglutarate. Many of these enzymes are involved in the modification of precursor proteins. Proline and lysine hydroxylases are required for the postsynthetic modifica- tion of procollagen to collagen, and proline hydroxylase is also required in formation of osteocalcin and the C1q com- ponent of complement. Aspartate β-hydroxylase is required for the postsynthetic modification of the precursor of protein C, the vitamin K-dependent protease that hydrolyzes acti- vated factor V in the blood-clotting cascade (see Chapter 52). Trimethyllysine and γ-butyrobetaine hydroxylases are required for the synthesis of carnitine. Vitamin C Deficiency Causes Scurvy Signs of vitamin C deficiency include skin changes, fragility of blood capillaries, gum decay, tooth loss, and bone frac- ture, many of which can be attributed to deficient collagen synthesis. There May Be Benefits from higher Intakes of Vitamin C At intakes above about 100 mg/d, the body’s capacity to metabolize vitamin C is saturated, and any further intake is excreted in the urine. However, in addition to its other roles, vitamin C enhances the absorption of inorganic iron, and this depends on the presence of the vitamin in the gut. Therefore, increased intakes may be beneficial. There is very little good evidence that high doses of vitamin C prevent the common cold, although they may reduce the duration and severity of symptoms. MINERALS ARE REQUIRED FOR BOTH PHYSIOLOGIC & BIOCHEMICAL FUNCTIONS Many of the essential minerals (Table 44–6) are widely dis- tributed in foods, and most people eating a mixed diet are likely to receive adequate intakes. The amounts required vary from grams per day for sodium and calcium, through mil- ligrams per day (eg, iron and zinc), to micrograms per day for the trace elements. In general, mineral deficiencies occur when foods come from one region where the soil may be defi- cient in some minerals (eg, iodine and selenium, deficiencies of both of which occur in many areas of the world). When foods come from a variety of regions, mineral deficiency is less likely to occur. Iron deficiency is an important problem world- wide, because if iron losses from the body are relatively high (eg, from heavy menstrual blood loss or intestinal parasites), it is difficult to achieve an adequate intake to replace losses. However, 10% of the population (and more in some areas) TABLE 44–6 Classification of Minerals According to Their Function Function Mineral Structural function Calcium, magnesium, phosphate Involved in membrane function Sodium, potassium Function as prosthetic groups in enzymes Cobalt, copper, iron, molybdenum, selenium, zinc Regulatory role or role in hormone action Calcium, chromium, iodine, mag- nesium, manganese, sodium, potassium Known to be essential, but func- tion unknown Silicon, vanadium, nickel, tin Have effects in the body, but essentiality is not established Fluoride, lithium May occur in foods and known to be toxic in excess Aluminum, arsenic, antimony, boron, bromine, cadmium, cesium, germanium, lead, mercury, silver, strontium are genetically at risk of iron overload, leading to formation of free radicals as a result of nonenzymic reactions of iron ions in free solution when the capacity of iron binding proteins has been exceeded. Foods grown on soil containing high levels of selenium cause toxicity, and excessive intakes of sodium cause hypertension in susceptible people. SUMMARY ■ Vitamins are organic nutrients with essential metabolic functions that are required in small amounts in the diet because they cannot be synthesized by the body. The lipid- soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) are hydrophobic molecules requiring normal fat absorption for their absorption and the avoidance of deficiency. ■ Vitamin A (retinol), present in meat, and the provitamin (β-carotene), found in plants, form retinaldehyde, utilized in vision, and retinoic acid, which acts in the control of gene expression. ■ Vitamin D is a steroid prohormone yielding the active hormone calcitriol, which regulates calcium and phosphate metabolism; deficiency leads to rickets and osteomalacia. It has a role in controlling cell differentiation and insulin secretion. ■ Vitamin E (tocopherol) is the most important lipid-soluble antioxidant in the body, acting in the lipid phase of membranes protecting against the effects of free radicals. ■ Vitamin K functions acts as the cofactor of a carboxylase that acts on glutamate residues of precursor proteins of clotting factors and bone and other proteins to enable them to chelate calcium. ■ The water-soluble vitamins act as enzyme cofactors. Thiamin is a cofactor in oxidative decarboxylation of α-keto acids and of transketolase in the pentose phosphate pathway. Riboflavin and niacin are important cofactors in oxidoreduction reactions, present in flavoprotein enzymes and in NAD and NADP, respectively. ■ Pantothenic acid is present in coenzyme A and acyl carrier protein, which act as carriers of acyl groups in metabolic reactions. Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library