and the patient must wait half an hour to eat or drink or take other medicines. The recommended starting dose is 3 mg daily for the first month and then increased to 7 mg daily. A dose of 14 mg daily can be used for additional glucose lowering. The most frequent adverse reactions of the GLP­1 receptor agonists are nausea (11–40%), vomiting (4–13%), and diarrhea (9–17%). The reactions are more frequent at the higher doses. All of the GLP­1 receptor agonists may increase the risk of pancreatitis. Patients on these drugs should be counseled to seek immediate medical care if they experience unexplained persistent severe abdominal pain. Cases of renal impairment and acute renal injury have been reported in patients taking exenatide. Some of these patients had preexisting kidney disease or other risk factors for renal injury. A number of them reported having nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea and it is possible that volume depletion contributed to the development of renal injury. Both exenatide and liraglutide stimulate thyroidal C­cell (parafollicular) tumors in rodents. Human thyroidal C cells express very few GLP­1 receptors, and the relevance to human therapy is unclear. The drugs, however, should not be used in persons with a past medical or family history of medullary thyroid cancer or multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndrome type 2. DUAL GLUCOSE­DEPENDENT INSULINOTROPIC POLYPEPTIDE (GIP) AND GLUCAGON­LIKE PEPTIDE­1 (GLP­1) RECEPTOR AGONIST Tirzepatide is a dual GIP/GLP­1 receptor agonist. It is an analog of the GIP hormone with a 1,20­eicosanedioic acid linked to the lysine residue at position 20. The peptide sequence also contains two non­coded amino acid residues (alpha amino isobutyric acid) at positions 2 and 13, and the c­ terminus is amidated. The acylation results in albumin binding, allowing for prolonged action and once­weekly dosing. The recommend starting dose is a 2.5­mg subcutaneous injection weekly. The dose is increased to 5 mg weekly after 4 weeks. If additional glucose lowering is needed, the dose can be increased by increments of 2.5 mg every 4 weeks to a maximum dose of 15 mg. Treatment with tirzepatide resulted in dose­dependent HbA1c reductions of 1.9% to 2.6%. The average weight loss ranged from 6.2 to 12.9 kg. Beneficial effects were observed on lipid profile, blood pressure lowering, and fatty liver. The safety profile is the same as with the GLP­1 receptor agonists. Gastrointestinal side effects (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea) occurred more frequently at the higher doses. In the clinical trials, there was a slightly higher rate of pancreatitis in the treated group compared with the comparator­treated group (0.23 vs 0.11 patients per 100 years of exposure). DIPEPTIDYL PEPTIDASE 4 (DPP­4) INHIBITORS Sitagliptin is given orally as 100 mg once daily, has an oral bioavailability of over 85%, achieves peak concentrations within 1–4 hours, and has a half­ life of approximately 12 hours. It is primarily excreted in the urine, in part by active tubular secretion of the drug. Hepatic metabolism is limited and mediated largely by the cytochrome CYP3A4 isoform and, to a lesser degree, by CYP2C8. The metabolites have insignificant activity. Dosage should be reduced in patients with impaired renal function (50 mg if estimated GFR is 30–50 mL/min per 1.73 m2 and 25 mg if <30 mL/min per 1.73 m2). Therapy with sitagliptin has resulted in HbA1c reductions of 0.5–1.0%. Saxagliptin (not available in the United States) is given orally as 2.5–5 mg daily. The drug reaches maximal concentrations within 2 hours (4 hours for its active metabolite). It is minimally protein bound and undergoes hepatic metabolism by CYP3A4/5. The major metabolite is active, and excretion is by both renal and hepatic pathways. The terminal plasma half­life is 2.5 hours for saxagliptin and 3.1 hours for its active metabolite. Dosage adjustment is recommended for individuals with renal impairment and concurrent use of strong inhibitors or inducers of CYP3A4/5 such as ketoconazole, some anticonvulsants, rifampin, and rifabutin. Linagliptin lowers HbA1c by 0.4–0.6% when added to metformin, sulfonylurea, or pioglitazone. The dosage is 5 mg daily orally and, since it is primarily excreted via the bile, no dosage adjustment is needed in renal failure. Alogliptin lowers HbA1c by about 0.5–0.6% when added to metformin, sulfonylurea, or pioglitazone. The usual dose is 25 mg orally daily. The 12.5­mg dose is used in patients with calculated creatinine clearance of 30 to 60 mL/min; the dose is 6.25 mg for clearance <30 mL/min. Vildagliptin (not available in the United States) lowers HbA1c levels by 01% when added to the therapeutic regimen of patients with type 2 diabetes. The dosage is 50 mg orally once or twice daily. The main adverse effect of DPP­4 inhibitors appears to be a predisposition to nasopharyngitis or upper respiratory tract infection. Hypersensitivity reactions including anaphylaxis, angioedema, and exfoliative skin conditions such as Stevens­Johnson syndrome have been reported. The frequency of pancreatitis is unclear. In clinical trials, of 5902 patients on alogliptin, pancreatitis occurred in 11 (0.2%) and in 5 of 5183 patients receiving all comparators (less than 0.1%). Cases of hepatic failure have been reported with the use of alogliptin, but it is uncertain if alogliptin was the cause. The medication, however, should be discontinued in the event of liver failure. Rare cases of hepatic dysfunction, including hepatitis, have been reported with the use of vildagliptin; and liver biochemical testing is recommended quarterly during the first year of use and periodically thereafter. Saxagliptin may increase the risk of heart failure (hazard ratio 1 27 found in a post marketing study) In a large postmarketing study alogliptin was associated