ChApTER 44 Micronutrients: Vitamins & Minerals 553 and of immunoglobulin by activated B-lymphocytes, dif- ferentiation of monocyte precursor cells, and modulation of cell proliferation. In most of these actions, it acts like a steroid hormone, binding to nuclear receptors and enhancing gene expression, although it also has rapid effects on calcium trans- porters in the intestinal mucosa. higher Intakes of Vitamin D May Be Beneficial There is growing evidence that higher vitamin D status is pro- tective against various cancers, including prostate and colorectal cancer, and also against prediabetes and the metabolic syndrome. Desirable levels of intake may be considerably higher than current reference intakes, and certainly could not be met from unfortified foods. While increased sunlight exposure would meet the need, it carries the risk of developing skin cancer. Vitamin D Deficiency Affects Children & Adults In the vitamin D deficiency disease rickets, the bones of children are undermineralized as a result of poor absorption of calcium. Similar problems occur as a result of deficiency during the adolescent growth spurt. Osteomalacia in adults results from the demineralization of bone, especially in women who have little exposure to sunlight, especially after several pregnancies. Although vitamin D is essential for pre- vention and treatment of osteomalacia in the elderly, there is less evidence that it is beneficial in treating osteoporosis. Vitamin D Is Toxic in Excess Some infants are sensitive to intakes of vitamin D as low as 50 μg/d, resulting in an elevated plasma concentration of calcium. This can lead to contraction of blood vessels, high blood pressure, and calcinosis—the calcification of soft tis- sues. In at least a few cases, hypercalcemia in response to low intakes of vitamin D is due to genetic defects of cal- cidiol 24-hydroxylase, the enzyme that leads to inactivation of the vitamin. Although excess dietary vitamin D is toxic, excessive exposure to sunlight does not lead to vitamin D poisoning, because there is a limited capacity to form the precursor, 7-dehydrocholesterol, and prolonged exposure of previtamin D to sunlight leads to formation of inactive compounds. VITAMIN E DOES NOT HAVE A PRECISELY DEFINED METABOLIC FUNCTION No unequivocal unique function for vitamin E has been defined. It acts as a lipid-soluble antioxidant in cell mem- branes, where many of its functions can be provided by syn- thetic antioxidants, and is important in maintaining the fluidity of cell membranes. It also has a (relatively poorly defined) role in cell signaling. Vitamin E is the generic descriptor for two families of compounds, the tocopherols and the tocotrienols (Figure 44–5). The different vitamers have different bio- logical potency; the most active is d-α-tocopherol, and it is usual to express vitamin E intake in terms of milligrams d-α-tocopherol equivalents. Synthetic dl-α-tocopherol does not have the same biologic potency as the naturally occurring compound. Vitamin E Is the Major Lipid-Soluble Antioxidant in Cell Membranes & plasma Lipoproteins The main function of vitamin E is as a chain-breaking, free-radical-trapping antioxidant in cell membranes and plasma lipoproteins by reacting with the lipid peroxide radi- cals formed by peroxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids (see Chapter 45). The tocopheroxyl radical is relatively unreac- tive, and ultimately forms nonradical compounds. Commonly, the tocopheroxyl radical is reduced back to tocopherol by reaction with vitamin C from plasma (Figure 44–6). The resultant, stable, monodehydroascorbate radical then under- goes enzymic or nonenzymic reaction to yield ascorbate and dehydroascorbate, neither of which is a radical. Vitamin E Deficiency In experimental animals, vitamin E deficiency results in resorption of fetuses and testicular atrophy. Dietary deficiency of vitamin E in human beings is unknown, although patients with severe fat malabsorption, cystic fibrosis, and some forms of chronic liver disease suffer deficiency because they are unable to absorb the vitamin or transport it, exhibiting nerve and muscle membrane damage. Premature infants are born with inadequate reserves of the vitamin. The erythrocyte membranes are abnormally fragile as a result of lipid peroxi- dation, leading to hemolytic anemia. VITAMIN K IS REQUIRED FOR SYNTHESIS OF BLOOD-CLOTTING PROTEINS Vitamin K was discovered as a result of investigations into the cause of a bleeding disorder, hemorrhagic (sweet clover) dis- ease of cattle and of chickens fed on a fat-free diet. The missing HO R3 CH3 R1 O R2 Tocopherol HO R3 CH3 R1 O R2 Tocotrienol FIGURE 44–5 Vitamin E vitamers. In α-tocopherol and tocot- rienol R1, R2, and R3 are all —CH3 groups. In the β-vitamers R2 is H, in the γ-vitamers R1 is H, and in the δ-vitamers R1 and R2 are both H. Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library