HDL cholesterol. A Mediterranean­style eating pattern (a diet supplemented with walnuts, almonds, hazelnuts, and olive oil) has been shown to improve glycemic control and lower combined endpoints for cardiovascular events and stroke. Caloric restriction and weight loss are important goals for the obese patient with type 2 diabetes. Education Education of the patient and family is a critical component of care. The patient should be informed about the kind of diabetes he or she has and the rationale for achieving target glucose levels (see Box: Benefits of Tight Glycemic Control in Diabetes). Glucose monitoring (CGM or BGM) should be emphasized, especially if the patient is on insulin or oral secretagogues that can cause hypoglycemia. The patient on insulin therapy should understand the time action profile of the insulins. He or she should know how to determine if the basal insulin dose is correct and how to adjust the rapidly acting insulin dose for carbohydrate content of meals. Insulin adjustments for exercise and infections should be discussed. The patient and family members also should be informed about the signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia. Benefits of Tight Glycemic Control in Diabetes A long­term randomized prospective study involving 1441 type 1 patients in 29 medical centers reported in 1993 that “near normalization” of blood glucose resulted in a delay in onset and a major slowing of progression of microvascular and neuropathic complications of diabetes during follow­ up periods of up to 10 years (Diabetes Control and Complications Trial [DCCT] Research Group, 1993). In the intensively treated group, mean glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) of 7.2% (normal <6%) and mean blood glucose of 155 mg/dL were achieved, whereas in the conventionally treated group, HbA1c averaged 8.9% with mean blood glucose of 225 mg/dL. Over the study period, which averaged 7 years, a reduction of approximately 60% in risk of diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy was noted in the tight control group compared with the standard control group. The DCCT study, in addition, introduced the concept of glycemic memory, which comprises the long­term benefits of any significant period of glycemic control. During a 6­year follow­up period, both the intensively and conventionally treated groups had similar levels of glycemic control, and both had progression of carotid intimal­medial thickness. However, the intensively treated cohort had significantly less progression of intimal thickness. The United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) was a very large randomized prospective study carried out to study the effects of intensive glycemic control with several types of therapies and the effects of blood pressure control in patients with type 2 diabetes. A total of 3867 newly diagnosed patients with type 2 diabetes were studied over 10 years. A significant fraction of these were overweight and hypertensive. Patients were given dietary treatment alone or intensive therapy with insulin, chlorpropamide, glyburide, or glipizide. Metformin was an option for patients with inadequate response to other therapies. Tight control of blood pressure was added as a variable, with an angiotensin­converting enzyme inhibitor, a β blocker, or in some cases, a calcium channel blocker available for this purpose. Tight control of diabetes, with reduction of HbA1c from 9.1% to 7%, was shown to reduce the risk of microvascular complications overall compared with that achieved with conventional therapy (mostly diet alone, which decreased HbA1c to 7.9%). Cardiovascular complications were not noted for any particular therapy; metformin treatment alone reduced the risk of macrovascular disease (myocardial infarction, stroke). Epidemiologic analysis of the study suggested that every 1% decrease in the HbA1c achieved an estimated risk reduction of 37% for microvascular complications, 21% for any diabetes­related end point and death related to diabetes, and 14% for myocardial infarction. Tight control of hypertension also had a surprisingly significant effect on microvascular disease (as well as more conventional hypertension­related sequelae) in these patients. Epidemiologic analysis of the results suggested that every 10­mm Hg decrease in the systolic pressure achieved an estimated risk reduction of 13% for diabetic microvascular complications, 12% for any diabetes­related complication, 15% for death related to diabetes, and 11% for myocardial infarction. Post­study monitoring showed that 5 years after the closure of the UKPDS, the benefits of intensive management on diabetic end points were maintained and the risk reduction for a myocardial infarction became significant. The benefits of metformin therapy were maintained. These studies show that tight glycemic control benefits both type 1 and type 2 diabetes patients.