C H A P T E R 2 Drug Design Strategies JOHN H. BLOCK to the right. At the same time, the drug will be expected to dissociate from the receptor and reenter the systemic circu- lation to be excreted. Major exceptions include the alkylat- ing agents used in cancer chemotherapy (see Chapter 10), a few inhibitors of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase (see Chapter 17), suicide inhibitors of monoamine oxidase (see Chapter 16), and the aromatase inhibitors 4-hydrox- yandrostenedione and exemestane (see Chapter 25). These pharmacological agents form covalent bonds with the re- ceptor, usually an enzyme’s active site. In these cases, the cell must destroy the receptor or enzyme, or, in the case of the alkylating agents, the cell would be replaced, ideally with a normal cell. In other words, the usual use of drugs in medical treatment calls for the drug’s effect to last for a finite period of time. Then, if it is to be repeated, the drug will be administered again. If the patient does not tolerate the drug well, it is even more important that the agent dis- sociate from the receptor and be excreted from the body. Oral Administration An examination of the obstacle course (Fig. 2.1) faced by the drug will give a better understanding of what is involved in developing a commercially feasible product. Assume that the drug is administered orally. The drug must go into solu- tion to pass through the gastrointestinal mucosa. Even drugs administered as true solutions may not remain in solution as they enter the acidic stomach and then pass into the alkaline intestinal tract. (This is explained further in the discussion on acid–base chemistry.) The ability of the drug to dissolve is governed by several factors, including its chemical struc- ture, variation in particle size and particle surface area, na- ture of the crystal form, type of tablet coating, and type of tablet matrix. By varying the dosage form and physical char- acteristics of the drug, it is possible to have a drug dissolve quickly or slowly, with the latter being the situation for many of the sustained-action products. An example is orally administered sodium phenytoin, with which variation of both the crystal form and tablet adjuvants can significantly alter the bioavailability of this drug widely used in the treat- ment of epilepsy. Chemical modification is also used to a limited extent to facilitate a drug reaching its desired target (see Chapter 3). An example is olsalazine, used in the treatment of ulcera- tive colitis. This drug is a dimer of the pharmacologically active mesalamine (5-aminosalicylic acid). The latter is not effective orally because it is metabolized to inactive forms before reaching the colon. The dimeric form passes C H A P T E R O V E R V I E W Modern drug design as compared with the classical approach—let’s make a change on an existing compound or synthesize a new structure and see what happens— continues to evolve rapidly as an approach to solving a drug design problem. The combination of increasing power and decreasing cost of desktop computing has had a major im- pact on solving drug design problems. Although drug design increasingly is based on modern computational chemical techniques, it also uses sophisticated knowledge of disease mechanisms and receptor properties. A good understanding of how the drug is transported into the body, distributed throughout the body compartments, metabolically altered by the liver and other organs, and excreted from the patient is required, along with the structural characteristics of the receptor. Acid–base chemistry is used to aid in formulation and biodistribution. Structural attributes and substituent pat- terns responsible for optimum pharmacological activity can often be predicted by statistical techniques such as re- gression analysis. Computerized conformational analysis permits the medicinal chemist to predict the drug’s three- dimensional (3D) shape that is seen by the receptor. With the isolation and structural determination of specific recep- tors and the availability of computer software that can esti- mate the 3D shape of the receptor, it is possible to design molecules that will show an optimum fit to the receptor. DRUG DISTRIBUTION A drug is a chemical molecule. Following introduction into the body, a drug must pass through many barriers, survive al- ternate sites of attachment and storage, and avoid significant metabolic destruction before it reaches the site of action, usually a receptor on or in a cell (Fig. 2.1). At the receptor, the following equilibrium (Rx. 2.1) usually holds: (Rx. 2.1) The ideal drug molecule will show favorable binding characteristics to the receptor, and the equilibrium will lie 3