Physiology 177 even after a carbohydrate meal. Signiﬁ cant glycosuria usually occurs only if the plasma glucose concentration exceeds about 10 mmol/L – the renal threshold. How the body maintains extracellular glucose concentrations Control of plasma glucose concentration During normal metabolism, little glucose is lost unchanged from the body. Maintenance of plasma glucose concentrations within the relatively narrow range of 4–10 mmol/L, despite the widely varying input from the diet, depends on the balance between the glucose entering cells from the ECF and that leaving them into this compartment. Hormones concerned with glucose homeostasis Some of the more important effects of hormones on glucose homeostasis are summarized in Table 12.2. Insulin Insulin is the most important hormone controlling plasma glucose concentrations. A plasma glucose concentration of greater than about 5 mmol/L acting via the glucose transporter 2 stimulates insulin release from the pancreas b-cell. These cells produce proinsulin, which consists of the 51-amino-acid polypeptide insulin and a linking peptide (C-peptide, Fig. 12.3). Splitting of the peptide bonds by prohormone convertases releases via intermediates (mostly 32–33 split proinsulin) equimolar amounts of insulin and C-peptide into the ECF. Insulin binds to speciﬁ c cell surface receptors on muscle and adipose tissue, thus enhancing the rate of glucose entry into these cells. Insulin-induced activation of enzymes stimulates glucose incorporation into glycogen (glycogenesis) in liver and muscle (Fig 12.4). Insulin also inhibits the production of glucose (gluconeogenesis) from fats and amino acids, partly by inhibiting fat and protein breakdown (lipolysis and proteolysis). The transport of glucose into liver cells is insulin independent but, by reducing the intracellular glucose concentration, insulin does indirectly promote the passive diffusion of glucose into them. Insulin also directly increases the transport of amino acids, potassium and phosphate into cells, especially muscle; these processes are independent of glucose transport. In the longer term, insulin regulates growth and development and the expression of certain genes. Glucagon Glucagon is a single-chain polypeptide synthesized by the a-cells of the pancreatic islets. Its secretion is stimulated by hypoglycaemia. Glucagon enhances hepatic glycogenolysis (glycogen breakdown) and gluconeogenesis. Glucose Glucose- 6-phosphate Fructose- 6-phosphate Fructose-1, 6-diphosphate Pyruvate Acetyl CoA Citrate Oxaloacetate Succinate Lactate Ribose- 5-phosphate TPP TPP TPP Transketolase Pyruvate dehydrogenase a-Ketoglutarate a-Ketoglutarate dehydrogenase Sedoheptulose- 7-phosphate Figure 12.2 Simpliﬁ cation of the tricarboxylic acid (Krebs) cycle. CoA, coenzyme A; TPP, thiamine pyrophosphate. Reproduced with kind permission from Candlish JK and Crook M. Notes on Clinical Biochemistry. Singapore: World Scientiﬁ c Publishing, 1993. C-PEPTIDE COO– NH3 + INSULIN S S S S S S Figure 12.3 Structure of proinsulin, indicating the cleavage sites at which insulin and C-peptide are produced.