C H A P T E R 10 Antineoplastic Agents FORREST T. SMITH AND C. RANDALL CLARK Increased knowledge of intercellular and intracellular communication has led to the development of several newer agents that have shown some effectiveness in treating sev- eral cancers, especially when used in combination with more traditional agents. These have included several mono- clonal antibodies that target the overproduction of growth factor receptors and TK inhibitors that target the transduc- tion process involved in growth factor stimulation. Progress against neoplastic disease has also been greatly aided by early detection resulting from increased public awareness and improved diagnostics. As a result, neoplasms are often detected before they have a chance to metastasize and become more difficult to treat. Surgery followed by chemotherapy is often effective in accomplishing a 5-year survival in cancers that are discovered early and have not metastasized. The approach to treatment depends on the ex- tent of the disease and the so-called stage. There are several methods of staging including the commonly used TNM sys- tem, where T—tumor, N—lymph node involvement, and M—metastasis. In this system, T and N are followed by numbers (1, 2, 3, etc.) to indicate the size of the tumor and the extent of lymph node involvement, respectively, where higher numbers are associated with more advanced disease. M is followed by either “0” to indicate metastasis has not oc- curred or “1” to indicate that it has. An alternative system uti- lizes stage 0 through stage IV designations, with higher num- bers indicating progression of the disease. In this system, stage IV indicates that the primary tumor has metastasized. Even with all the advancements, progress in many cases has been very slow. In comparing 5-year survival rates for patients with pancreatic cancer diagnosed between 1975 and 1977, with those diagnosed between 1996 and 2003, the rate increased from 2% to only 5%. Five-year survival rates for lung cancer patients increased from 13% to 16% during the same interval. It is obvious that these results do not repre- sent tremendous progress in these types of cancer, and some of the increase may be ascribed to increased public aware- ness and better diagnostic methods that have allowed for earlier detection. This is important because the starting date in calculating a 5-year survival rate is the day of initial de- tection. This lack of progress in lung cancer is especially ominous since the American Cancer Society estimates that lung cancer will account for the greatest percentage of can- cer deaths in 2008.1 As part of the definition, cancer is a group of diseases and these have been traditionally grouped together based on the organ in which the cancer originated. Even this grouping is somewhat misleading, because all cancers of a particular organ may not be caused by the same genetic alterations. This has important consequences for therapy, C H A P T E R O V E R V I E W Antineoplastic agents describe the chemistry, use, metabo- lism, and adverse effect profiles for the alkylating agents, antibiotics, natural products, antimetabolites, and tyrosine kinase (TK) inhibitors used in the treatment of cancer. Emphasis has been placed on understanding how cell division and cell death are regulated and how drugs may influence these processes as well as how cancer cells may become re- sistant to the actions of the antineoplastics. Topics such as apoptosis, DNA alkylation, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and the role of growth factors in controlling transcription and translation are especially important in the discussion of anti- neoplastic agents; however, in a wider sense, it is important for pharmacists to appreciate the role of these subjects in sev- eral other areas such as neurodegenerative diseases, muta- genicity, cardiovascular toxicity, and cell signaling. INTRODUCTION The American Cancer Society defines cancer as a group of diseases characterized by uncontrolled growth, and the spread of abnormal cells that left untreated may lead to death. Related to this definition is the term neoplasia, which is the uncontrolled growth of new tissue, the product of which is known as a tumor, and these tumors may be either malignant or benign. Malignant tumors have the capability of invading surrounding tissues and moving to distant locations in the body in a process known as metastasis; characteristics that benign tumors do not possess. Treatment of malignant tu- mors or cancer has generally involved initially surgical removal followed by radiation and/or chemotherapy, if nec- essary. In those cases where complete surgical removal is not feasible, radiation and chemotherapy become the only avail- able options. The term chemotherapy, in the strictest sense, refers to drugs that are used to kill cells and includes both an- tibiotics and agents used in the treatment of cancer, but it is often used to refer exclusively to anticancer agents also known as antineoplastics. Traditional chemotherapy has been based on the principle of selective toxicity; however, this has been difficult to achieve in the case of cancer cells because these cells utilize the biochemical pathways used by normal cells. In many cases, the agents have attempted to ex- ploit the increased proliferative rates of cancer cells com- pared with normal cells. This has been difficult to achieve even in a relative sense because, in part, of the fact that not all normal tissue is slowly proliferative and, conversely, not all cancer cells are highly proliferative. 355