1See Chapter 12. 11–3). TABLE 11–3 Mechanisms of action of vasodilators. Mechanism Examples Release of nitric oxide from drug or endothelium Nitroprusside, hydralazine, nitrates,1 histamine, acetylcholine Reduction of calcium influx Verapamil, diltiazem, nifedipine1 Hyperpolarization of cell membranes through opening of potassium channels Minoxidil, diazoxide Activation of dopamine receptors Fenoldopam Chapter 12 contains additional discussion of vasodilators. All the vasodilators that are useful in hypertension relax smooth muscle of arterioles, thereby decreasing systemic vascular resistance. Sodium nitroprusside and the nitrates also relax veins. Decreased arterial resistance and decreased mean arterial blood pressure elicit compensatory responses, mediated by baroreceptors and the sympathetic nervous system (see Figure 11–4), as well as increases in renin, angiotensin, and aldosterone. Because sympathetic reflexes are intact, vasodilator therapy does not cause orthostatic hypotension or sexual dysfunction. Vasodilators work best in combination with other antihypertensive drugs that oppose the compensatory cardiovascular responses. (See Box: Resistant Hypertension & Polypharmacy.) HYDRALAZINE Hydralazine, a hydrazine derivative, dilates arterioles but not veins. It has been available for many years, although it was initially thought not to be particularly effective because tachyphylaxis to its antihypertensive effects developed rapidly. The benefits of combination therapy are now recognized, and hydralazine may be used more effectively, particularly in severe hypertension. The combination of hydralazine with nitrates is effective in heart failure and should be considered in patients with both hypertension and heart failure, especially in patients who are intolerant to angiotensin inhibiting drugs. Pharmacokinetics & Dosage Hydralazine is well absorbed and rapidly metabolized by the liver during the first pass, so that bioavailability is low (averaging 25%) and variable among individuals. It is metabolized in part by acetylation at a rate that appears to be bimodally distributed in the population (see Chapter 4). As a consequence, rapid acetylators have greater first­pass metabolism, lower blood levels, and less antihypertensive benefit from a given dose than do slow acetylators. The half­life of hydralazine ranges from 1.5 to 3 hours, but vascular effects persist longer than do blood concentrations, possibly due to avid binding to vascular tissue. Usual dosage ranges from 40 to 200 mg/d. The higher dosage was selected as the dose at which there is a small possibility of developing the lupus erythematosus­like syndrome described in the next section However higher dosages result in greater vasodilation and may be used if necessary