C HAPTE R 20 Novel Dosage Forms and Drug Delivery Technologies 565 FIGURE 20.13. Gliadel wafer removed from sterile foil pouch in prepa­ ration for implantation. (Courtesy of Guilford Pharmaceuticals.) aseptic working environment, the inner pouch is treated as a sterile item. Gliadel wafers must be stored at or below -20°C (18). Goserelin Implant (Zoladex) Goserelin acetate implant (Zoladex, AstraZeneca) is a ster­ ile, biodegradable product containing goserelin acetate, equivalent to 3.6 mg of drug, designed for subcutaneous injection with continuous release over 28 days. Goserelin acetate is dispersed in a matrix consisting of D,L-lactic and glycolic acid copolymer (13.3 to 14.3 mg/dose) containing less than 2.5% acetic acid and up to 12% goserelin-related substances. It is a sterile white to cream-colored cylin­ der 1 mm in diameter, preloaded in a special single-use syringe with a 16-gauge needle. The unit is packaged in a sealed light- and moisture-proof aluminum foil laminate pouch containing a desiccant capsule. Zoladex is indicated for a number of disorders, includ­ ing the palliative treatment of advanced carcinoma of the prostate, offering an alternative to orchiectomy and/ or estrogen administration when the standard treatments are not indicated or are unacceptable to the patient. It is also used in the treatment of endometriosis and advanced breast cancer. Zoladex is also available as Zoladex 3-Month, contain­ ing the equivalent of 10.8 mg of goserelin. The base con­ sists of a matrix of D,L-lactic and glycolic acid copolymer (12.82 to 14.76 mg/dose) containing less than 2% acetic acid and up to 10% goserelin-related substances and pre­ sented as a sterile white to cream-colored cylinder 1.5 mm in diameter, preloaded in a special single-use syringe with a 14-gauge needle and overwrap, as previously described. This preparation is designed for administration every 3 months (19). FIGURE 20.14. Gliadel wafer implanted in the brain. (Courtesy of Guilford Pharmaceuticals.)