160 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS FIGURE 5.18. Computed gas chromatography with head­ space injector. (Courtesy of ARL BioPharma, Inc. d/b/a Analytical Research Laboratories.) Alternatively, even though pharmacokinetic dosing formulas may exist, one must be cognizant that patient factors may be more relevant. For example, with the geri­ atric patient, it is advisable to begin drug therapy with the lowest possible dose and increase the dosage as neces­ sary in small increments to optimize the patient's clinical response. Then the patient should be monitored for drug efficacy and reevaluated periodically. Examples ofbioana­ lytical research laboratories are demonstrated in Figures 5.18 and 5.19. FIGURE 5.19. Assay of product samples using high­ performance liquid chromatography-mass spectroscopy. (Courtesy of ARL BioPharma, Inc d/b/a Analytical Research Laboratories.) APPLYING THE PRINCIPLES AND CONCEPTS GROUP ACTIVITIES 1. List the partition coefficients for erythromycin and its related chemical entities and predict comparable effectiveness when administered in a topical dosage form. 2. Create a listing of five prodrugs used therapeuti­ cally and describe the rationale for the use of each prodrug. 3. Select a drug available in various chemical moieties that dictate varying parenteral dosage forms and describe the effect of chemical formula on its onset of activity, duration of activity, etc., of the drug. 4. Given a serum concentration-time curve for a spe­ cific drug, determine the peak height concentration, the time of the peak concentration, and the serum ( or blood or plasma) area under the curve. 5. Given a blood concentration versus time plot, per­ form various pharmacokinetic calculations. 6. Given comparative bioavailability data and cost information for identical drug products from dif­ ferent manufacturers, select a product for the hos­ pital formulary and provide a rationale for your decision. 7. Make a listing of drug products whose brand names include the term "elixir" but have little or no Alcohol USP in their formulations. INDIVIDUAL ACTIVITIES 1. Explain, with examples, how a drug's particle size influences its dissolution rate and solubility. 2. List four clinically available drugs that demonstrate either amorphous or crystalline forms, and describe the rationale for using a specific form for therapy. 3. Describe patient situations where one drug delivery approach would have advantages over another drug delivery approach. 4. Given a patient's data, calculate pharmacokinetic parameters. 5. Develop a listing of drugs dosed on peak and trough levels, and given patient data, demonstrate calcula­ tions for one such drug. 6. Given a patient case, select appropriate drug therapy, and determine an appropriate dosage regimen for the patient. Also, the selection of appropriate drug therapy should include flavor preference and discus­ sion if a pediatric patient. Provide your rationale.