ChAPTER 45 Free Radicals & Antioxidant Nutrients 567 hydroxyl radicals, rather then undergoing complete reduction to water. This results in daily production of about 1.5 mol of reactive oxygen species. There Are Various Mechanisms of Protection Against Radical Damage The metal ions that undergo nonenzymic reaction to form oxygen radicals are not normally free in solution, but are bound to either the proteins for which they provide the pros- thetic group, or to specific transport and storage proteins, so that they are unreactive. Iron is bound to transferrin, ferritin, and hemosiderin, copper to ceruloplasmin, and other metal ions are bound to metallothionein. This binding to transport proteins that are too large to be filtered in the kidneys also prevents loss of metal ions in the urine. Superoxide is produced both accidentally and also as the reactive oxygen species required for a number of enzyme- catalyzed reactions. A family of superoxide dismutases cata- lyze the reaction between superoxide and protons to yield oxygen and hydrogen peroxide: •O2 − + 2H+ → H2O2 The hydrogen peroxide is then removed by catalase and various peroxidases: 2H2O2 → 2H2O + O2. Most enzymes that produce and require superoxide are contained in the peroxisomes, together with superoxide dismutase, catalase, and peroxidases. The peroxides that are formed by radical damage to lipids in membranes and plasma lipoproteins are reduced to hydroxy fatty acids by glutathione peroxidase, a selenium-dependent enzyme (hence the importance of adequate selenium intake to maximize antioxidant activity), and the oxidized glutathi- one is reduced by NADPH-dependent glutathione reductase (see Figure 20–3). Lipid peroxides are also reduced to fatty acids by reaction with vitamin E, forming the tocopheroxyl radical, which is relatively stable, since the unpaired electron can be located in any one of three positions in the molecule (Figure 45-3). The tocopheroxyl radical persists long enough to undergo reduction back to tocopherol by reaction with vita- min C at the surface of the cell or lipoprotein (see Figure 44–6). The resultant monodehydroascorbate radical then undergoes enzymic reduction back to ascorbate or a nonenzymic reac- tion of 2 mol of monodehydroascorbate to yield 1 mol each of ascorbate and dehydroascorbate. Ascorbate, uric acid and a variety of polyphenols derived from plant foods act as water-soluble radical trapping antioxi- dants, forming relatively stable radicals that persist long enough to undergo reaction to nonradical products. Ubiquinone and carotenes similarly act as lipid-soluble radical-trapping anti- oxidants in membranes and plasma lipoproteins. The Antioxidant Paradox—Antioxidants Can Also Be Pro-Oxidants Although ascorbate is an antioxidant, reacting with superoxide and hydroxyl to yield monodehydroascorbate and hydrogen peroxide or water, it can also be a source of superoxide radi- cals by reaction with oxygen, and hydroxyl radicals by reac- tion with Cu2+ ions (Table 45–1). However, these pro-oxidant actions require relatively high concentrations of ascorbate, which are unlikely to be reached in tissues, since once the plasma concentration of ascorbate reaches about 30 mmol/L, the renal threshold is reached, and at intakes above about 100 to 120 mg/d the vitamin is excreted in the urine quantita- tively with intake. A considerable body of epidemiological evidence suggests that carotene is protective against lung and other cancers. However, two major intervention trials in the 1990s showed an increase in death from lung (and other) cancer among people given supplements of β-carotene. The problem is that although β-carotene is indeed a radical-trapping antioxidant under conditions of low partial pressure of oxygen, as in most tissues, at high partial pressures of oxygen (as in the lungs) and especially in high concentrations, β-carotene is an auto- catalytic pro-oxidant, and hence can initiate radical damage to lipids and proteins. Epidemiological evidence also suggests that vitamin E is protective against atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease. However, meta-analysis of intervention trials with vitamin E shows increased mortality among those taking (high dose) supplements. These trials have all used α-tocopherol, and it is possible that the other vitamers of vitamin E that are present in foods, but not the supplements, may be important. In vitro, plasma lipoproteins form less cholesterol ester hydroperoxide when incubated with sources of low concentrations of perhy- droxyl radicals when vitamin E has been removed than when it is present. The problem seems to be that vitamin E acts as an antioxidant by forming a stable radical that persists long enough to undergo metabolism to nonradical products. This means that the radical also persists long enough to penetrate deeper in to the lipoprotein, causing further radical damage, rather than interacting with a water-soluble antioxidant at the surface of the lipoprotein. O CH3 O H3C CH3 CH3 O CH2 HO H3C CH3 CH3 O CH3 O H3C CH3 CH3 FIGURE 45–3 Delocalisation of the unpaired electron in the tocopheroxyl radical. Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library