CHAPTER 5 Dosage Form Design: Biopharmaceutical and Pharmacokinetic Considerations 131 However, if in the new environment it is greatly ionized because of the influence of the pH of the second fluid, it likely will be unable to cross the membrane with its former ability. Thus, a concentration gradient of a drug usually is reached at equilibrium on each side of a membrane because different degrees of ionization occur on each side. A summary of the concepts of dissociation and ionization is found in Physical Pharmacy Capsules 4.8 and 4.10. It is often desirable for pharmaceutical scientists to make structural modifications in organic drugs and thereby favorably alter their lipid solubility, partition coef­ ficients, and dissociation constants while maintaining the same basic pharmacologic activity. These efforts fre­ quently result in increased absorption, better therapeutic response, and lower dosage. Specialized Transport Mechanisms In contrast to the passive transfer of drugs and other substances across a biologic membrane, certain sub­ stances, including some drugs and biologic metabolites, are conducted across a membrane through one of several postulated specialized transport mechanisms. This type of transfer seems to account for substances, many naturally occurring as amino acids and glucose, that are too lipid insoluble to dissolve in the boundary and too large to flow or filter through the pores. This type of transport is thought to involve membrane components that may be enzymes or some other type of agent capable of forming a complex with the drug (or other agent) at the surface membrane. The complex moves across the membrane, where the drug is released, with the carrier returning to the original surface. Figure 5.2 presents the simplified scheme of this process. Specialized transport may be dif­ ferentiated from passive transfer in that the former pro­ cess may become saturated as the amount of carrier for a given substance becomes completely bound with that substance, resulting in a delay in transport. Other features D --+- D FIGURE 5.2. Active transport mechanism. D, drug molecule; C, the carrier in the membrane. (Adapted from O'Reilly WJ. Biological factors in dosage design I: Membranes and drug absorption. Aust J Pharm 1 966;47(Supp 42):S51 , with permission.) of specialized transport include the specificity by a car­ rier for a particular type of chemical structure, so that if two substances are transported by the same mechanism or carrier, one will competitively inhibit the transport of the other. Furthermore, the transport mechanism is inhibited in general by substances that interfere with cell metabolism. The term active transport as a subclassifica­ tion of specialized transport denotes a process with the additional feature of the solute or drug being moved across the membrane against a concentration gradient, that is, from a solution of lower concentration to one of a higher concentration or, if the solute is an ion, against an electro­ chemical potential gradient. In contrast to active transport, facilitated diffusion is a specialized transport mechanism having all of the described characteristics except that the solute is not transferred against a concentration gradient and may attain the same concentration inside the cell as on the outside. Many body nutrients, such as sugars and amino acids, are transported across the membranes of the gastrointes­ tinal tract by carrier processes. Certain vitamins, such as thiamine, niacin, riboflavin, and pyridoxine, and drug sub­ stances, such as methyldopa and 5-fluorouracil, require active transport mechanisms for their absorption. Investigations of intestinal transport have often used in situ (at the site) or in vivo (in the body) animal models or ex vivo (outside the body) transport models; how­ ever, recently cell culture models of human small intes­ tine absorptive cells have become available to investigate transport across intestinal epithelium (1). Both passive and transport-mediated studies have been conducted to investigate mechanisms and rates of transport. I DISSOLUTION AND DRUG ABSORPTION For a drug to be absorbed, it must first be dissolved in the fluid at the absorption site. For instance, a drug adminis­ tered orally in tablet or capsule form cannot be absorbed until the drug particles are dissolved by the fluids in the gastrointestinal tract. When the solubility of a drug depends on either an acidic or basic medium, the drug dis­ solves in the stomach or intestines, respectively (Fig. 5.3). The process by which a drug particle dissolves is termed dissolution. As a drug particle undergoes dissolution, the drug mol­ ecules on the surface are the first to enter into solution, creating a saturated layer of drug solution that envelops the surface of the solid drug particle. This layer of solu­ tion is the diffusion layer. From this diffusion layer, the drug molecules pass throughout the dissolving fluid and make contact with the biologic membranes, and absorp­ tion ensues. As the molecules of drug continue to leave the diffusion layer, the layer is replenished with dissolved drug from the surface of the drug particle, and the process of absorption continues.