stimulates production of angiotensin and aldosterone, which further increase blood pressure. Hypertensive encephalopathy is a classic feature of malignant hypertension. Its clinical presentation consists of severe headache, mental confusion, and apprehension. Blurred vision, nausea and vomiting, and focal neurologic deficits are common. If untreated, the syndrome may progress over a period of 12–48 hours to convulsions, stupor, coma, and even death. Treatment of Hypertensive Emergencies The general management of hypertensive emergencies requires monitoring the patient in an intensive care unit with continuous recording of arterial blood pressure. Fluid intake and output must be monitored carefully, and body weight measured daily as an indicator of total body fluid volume during the course of therapy. Parenteral antihypertensive medications are used to lower blood pressure rapidly (within a few hours); as soon as reasonable blood pressure control is achieved, oral antihypertensive therapy should be substituted because this allows smoother long­term management of hypertension. The goal of treatment in the first few hours or days is not complete normalization of blood pressure because chronic hypertension is associated with autoregulatory changes in cerebral blood flow. Thus, rapid normalization of blood pressure may lead to cerebral hypoperfusion and brain injury. Rather, blood pressure should be lowered by about 25%, maintaining diastolic blood pressure at no less than 100–110 mm Hg. Subsequently, blood pressure can be reduced to normal using oral medications over several weeks. The parenteral drugs used to treat hypertensive emergencies include sodium nitroprusside, nitroglycerin, labetalol, calcium channel blockers, fenoldopam, and hydralazine. Esmolol is often used to manage intraoperative and postoperative hypertension. Diuretics such as furosemide are administered to prevent the volume expansion that typically occurs during administration of powerful vasodilators. SUMMARY Drugs Used in Hypertension Subclass, Drug Mechanism of Action Effects Clinical Applications Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, Interactions DIURETICS • Thiazides: Hydrochlorothiazide, chlorthalidone Block Na/Cl transporter in renal distal convoluted tubule Reduce blood volume and poorly understood vascular effects Hypertension, mild heart failure • Loop diuretics: Furosemide Block Na/K/2Cl transporter in renal loop of Henle Like thiazides • greater efficacy Severe hypertension, heart failure See Chapter 15 • Spironolactone, eplerenone Block aldosterone receptor in renal collecting tubule Increase Na and decrease K excretion • poorly understood reduction in heart failure mortality Aldosteronism, heart failure, hypertension ANGIOTENSIN­CONVERTING ENZYME (ACE) INHIBITORS • Captopril, many others Inhibit angiotensin­ converting enzyme Reduce angiotensin II levels • reduce vasoconstriction and aldosterone secretion • increase bradykinin Hypertension • heart failure, diabetes Oral • Toxicity: Cough, angioedema • hyperkalemia • renal impairment • teratogenic