which normally presents as leucopenia. In addition, the drug produces nausea and vomiting in 30% to 40% of patients, which is more commonly seen when the drug is administered orally. The agent also produces anorexia, alopecia, mucositis, and hypersensitivity reactions that may be caused by etopo- side or Cremophor EL (polyoxyethylated castor oil), which is used as a vehicle for IV administration of the drug. Leukemia, especially acute myelogenous leukemia, has been associated with the drugs’ ability to produce strand breaks with resultant translocation of genetic material. The leukemias are generally seen 5 to 8 years posttreatment and have been associated with translocation of several different genes resulting in break- points around the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene. Transcription and translation of this altered DNA gives chimeric proteins, which form partly from the translocated gene and partly from the MLL gene. Exactly how these chimeric proteins lead to leukemia is not known, but similar alterations are seen with other topoisomerase inhibitors. Etoposide phosphate is a prodrug of etoposide and is con- verted to the parent by the action of phosphatases. The in- creased water solubility does not require Cremophor EL or other vehicles to be used. The agent is administered IV and used in the treatment of germ cell tumors, small cell lung cancers, and NSCLCs. TENIPOSIDE (VM-26, VUMON) Teniposide is available in 50-mg ampules with Cremophor EL for IV administration in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). The agent is more potent as an inhibitor of topoisomerase II. The pharmacokinetics of teniposide is similar to that of etoposide; however, the more lipophilic teni- poside is more highly protein bound (99%) and less is excreted unchanged in the urine (10%–20%). There is also greater overall metabolism of teniposide; however, CYP3A4- mediated conversion to the active catechol is slower compared with etoposide. Elimination occurs primarily in the urine with a terminal elimination half-life of 5 hours. Camptothecins The camptothecins (Fig. 10.16) are inhibitors of topoisom- erase I and are used clinically for the treatment of various Chapter 10 Antineoplastic Agents 391 Scheme 10.27 Metabolism of epipodophyllotoxins.