CHAPTER 5 Dosage Form Design: Biopharmaceutical and Pharmacokinetic Considerations 129 I PRINCIPLES OF DRUG ABSORPTION Before an administered drug can arrive at its site of action in effective concentrations, it must surmount a number of barriers. These barriers are chiefly a succession of biologic membranes such as those of the gastrointestinal epithe­ lium, lungs, blood, and brain. Body membranes are gener­ ally classified as three main types: (a) those composed of several layers of cells, like the skin; (b) those composed of a single layer of cells, like the intestinal epithelium; and (c) those less than one cell thick, like the membrane of a single cell. In most instances, a drug substance must pass more than one of these membrane types before it reaches its site of action. For instance, a drug taken by mouth must first traverse the gastrointestinal membranes (stomach and intestines), gain entrance to the general circulation, pass to the organ or tissue with which it has affinity, gain entrance to that tissue, and then enter its individual cells. Although the chemistry of body membranes differs one from another, the membranes may be viewed in general as a bimolecular lipoid (fat-containing) layer attached on both sides to a protein layer. Drugs are thought to pen­ etrate these biologic membranes in two general ways: (a) by passive diffusion and (b) through specialized transport mechanisms. Within each of these main categories, more clearly defined processes have been ascribed to drug transfer. Passive Diffusion The term passive diffusion is used to describe the pas­ sage of ( drug) molecules through a membrane that does not actively participate in the process. Drugs absorbed according to this method are said to be passively absorbed. The absorption process is driven by the concentration gradient (i.e., the differences in concentration) across the membrane, with the passage of drug molecules occurring primarily from the side of high concentration. Most drugs pass through biologic membranes by diffusion. Passive diffusion is described by Fick first law (Physical Pharmacy Capsule 4.8), which states that the rate of dif­ fusion or transport across a membrane (dc/dt) is propor­ tional to the difference in drug concentration on both sides of the membrane: where C1 and C2 are the drug concentrations on each side of the membrane and P is a permeability coefficient or constant. The term C1 is customarily used to represent the com­ partment with the greater concentration of drug, and thus the transport of drug proceeds from compartment 1 (e.g., absorption site) to compartment 2 (e.g., blood). The concentration of drug at the site of absorption ( C1) is usually much greater than on the other side of the mem- brane because of the rapid dilution of the drug in the blood and its subsequent distribution to the tissues, so for practi­ cal purposes, the value of C1 - C2 may be taken simply as that of C1 and the equation written in the standard form for a first-order rate equation: - de = PC dt 1 The gastrointestinal absorption of most drugs from solu­ tion occurs in this manner in accordance with first-order kinetics, in which the rate depends on drug concentration; that is, doubling the dose doubles the transfer rate. The magnitude of the permeability constant depends on the diffusion coefficient of the drug, the thickness and area of the absorbing membrane, and the permeability of the membrane to the particular drug. Because of the lipoid nature of the cell membrane, it is highly permeable to lipid-soluble substances. The rate of diffusion of a drug across the membrane depends not only on its concentration but also on the relative extent of its affinity for lipid and rejection of water (a high lipid parti­ tion coefficient). The greater its affinity for lipid and the more hydrophobic it is, the faster will be its rate of penetra­ tion into the lipid-rich membrane. Erythromycin base, for example, possesses a higher partition coefficient than do other erythromycin compounds, for example, estolate and gluceptate. Consequently, the base is the preferred agent for the topical treatment of acne where penetration into the skin is desired. Because biologic cells are also permeated by water and lipid-insoluble substances, it is thought that the mem­ brane also contains water-filled pores or channels that permit the passage of these types of substances. As water passes in bulk across a porous membrane, any dissolved solute with small enough molecules to traverse the pores passes in by filtration. Aqueous pores vary in size from membrane to membrane and thus in their individual permeability characteristics for certain drugs and other substances. Most drugs today are weak organic acids or bases. Knowledge of their individual ionization or dissociation characteristics is important, because their absorption is governed to a large extent by their degrees of ionization as they are presented to the membrane barriers. Cell mem­ branes are more permeable to the un-ionized forms of drugs than to their ionized forms, mainly because of the greater lipid solubility of the un-ionized forms and the highly charged nature of the cell membrane, which results in binding or repelling of the ionized drug and thereby decreases cell penetration. Also, ions become hydrated through association with water molecules, resulting in larger particles than the undissociated molecule and again decreased penetrating capability. The degree of a drug's ionization depends both on the pH of the solution in which it is presented to the biologic membrane and on the pK., or dissociation constant, of