Physiology 179 The entry of glucose into liver and cerebral cells is not directly affected by insulin, but depends on the extracellular glucose concentration. The conversion of glucose to glucose-6-phosphate (G6P), the ﬁ rst step in glucose metabolism in all cells, is catalysed in the liver by the enzyme glucokinase, which has a low afﬁ nity for glucose compared with that of hexokinase, which is found in most other tissues. Glucokinase activity is induced by insulin. Therefore, hepatic cells extract proportionally less glucose during fasting, when concentrations in portal venous plasma are low, than after carbohydrate ingestion. This helps to maintain a fasting supply of glucose to vulnerable tissues such as the brain. The liver cells can store some of the excess glucose as glycogen. The rate of glycogen synthesis (glycogenesis) from G6P may be increased by insulin secreted by the b-cells of the pancreas in response to systemic hyperglycaemia. The liver can convert some of the excess glucose to fatty acids, which are ultimately transported as triglyceride in very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) and stored in adipose tissue. Under normal aerobic conditions, the liver can synthesize glucose by gluconeogenesis using the metabolic products from other tissues, such as glycerol, lactate or the carbon chains resulting from deamination of certain amino acids (mainly alanine) (Table 12.3). The liver contains the enzyme glucose-6-phosphatase, which, by hydrolysing G6P derived from either glycogenolysis or gluconeogenesis, releases glucose and helps to maintain extracellular fasting concentrations. Hepatic glycogenolysis is stimulated by the hormone glucagon, secreted by the a-cells of the pancreas in response to a fall in the plasma glucose concentration, and by catecholamines such as adrenaline or noradrenaline. During fasting, the liver converts fatty acids, released from adipose tissue as a consequence of low insulin activity, to ketones. The carbon chains of some amino acids may also be converted to ketones (Table 12.3). Ketones can be used by other tissues, including the brain, as an energy source when plasma glucose concentrations are low. Other organs The renal cortex is the only other tissue capable of gluconeogenesis, and of converting G6P to glucose. The gluconeogenic capacity of the kidney is particularly important in hydrogen ion homeostasis and during prolonged fasting. Other tissues, such as muscle, can store glycogen but, because they do not contain glucose-6-phosphatase, they cannot release glucose from cells and so can only use it locally; this glycogen plays no part in maintaining the plasma glucose concentration. Systemic effects of glucose intake The liver modifies the potential hyperglycaemic effect of a high-carbohydrate meal by extracting relatively more glucose than in the fasting state from the portal plasma. However, some glucose does pass through the liver and the rise in the systemic concentration Table 12.3 Metabolism of the carbon skeleton of some amino acids to either carbohydrate (glycogenic) or fat (ketogenic) Glycogenic Glycogenic and ketogenic Ketogenic Alanine Isoleucine Leucine Arginine Lysine Glycine Phenylalanine Histidine Tyrosine Methionine Serine Valine Figure 12.4 Structure of glycogen. Open circles depict glucose moieties in a-1,4 linkage and the black circles those in a-1,6 linkages at branch points. R indicates the reducing end group. The outer branches terminate in non-reducing end groups. Reproduced with permission from Nyhan WL and Barshop BA. Atlas of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, 3rd edition. London: Hodder Arnold, 2012. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 4 Inner branches R Outer branches