CHAPTER 5 Dosage Form Design: Biopharmaceutical and Pharmacokinetic Considerations 137 2. Abbreviated New Drug Applications (ANDAs): In vivo bioavailability data are required unless information is provided and accepted supporting a waiver of this requirement (see waiver provisions following). 3. Supplemental Applications: In vivo bioavailability data are required if there is a change in the following: a. Manufacturing process, product formulation, or dosage strength beyond the variations provided for in the approved NDA b. Labeling to provide for a new indication for use of the drug product and if clinical studies are required, to support the new indication c. Labeling to provide for a new or additional dos­ age regimen for a special patient population ( e.g., infants) if clinical studies are required to support the new or additional dosage regimen Conditions under which the FDA may waive the in vivo bioavailability requirement are as follows: 1. The drug product is a parenteral, ophthalmic, or otic solution and contains the same active agent in the same concentration and solvent as a product previ­ ously approved through a full NDA. 2. The drug product is administered by inhalation as a gas or vapor and contains the same active agent in the same dosage form as a product previously approved through a full NDA. 3. The drug product is an oral solution, elixir, syrup, tinc­ ture, or similar other solubilized form and contains the same active agent in the same concentration as a previously approved drug product through a full NDA and contains no inactive ingredient known to signifi­ cantly affect absorption of the active drug ingredient. 4. The drug product is a topically applied preparation (e.g., ointment) intended for local therapeutic effect. 5. The drug product is an oral form that is not intended to be absorbed ( e.g., antacid or radiopaque medium). 6. The drug product is a solid oral form that has been demonstrated to be identical or sufficiently similar to a drug product that has met the in vivo bioavailability requirement. Most bioavailability and bioequivalence studies are applied to drugs prepared into solid dosage forms intended to be administered orally. This is due to the fact that the major­ ity of new pharmaceutical products are first developed and marketed as tablets and capsules, and later, competing non­ proprietary (generic) products are developed in the same forms. Consequently, much of the discussion, which follows, focuses on studies of orally administered dosage forms. However, this is not to imply that other dosage forms and routes of administration are free from bioavailability studies. Blood, Serum, or Plasma Concentration-Time Curve Following oral administration of a medication, if blood samples are drawn from the patient at specific time inter­ vals and analyzed for drug content, the resulting data may be plotted on ordinary graph paper to yield the type of drug blood level curve presented in Figure 5.4. The vertical axis of this type of plot characteristically pres­ ents the concentration of drug in the blood ( or serum or plasma), and the horizontal axis presents the time the samples were obtained following the administration of the drug. When the drug is first administered (time zero), the blood concentration of the drug should also be zero. As the drug passes into the stomach and/ or intestine, it is released from the dosage form, eventually dissolves, and is absorbed. As the sampling and analysis continue, the blood samples reveal increasing concentrations of drug (positive slope of the curve) until the maximum (peak) concentration ( Cm.J is reached. Then, the blood level of the drug decreases (negative slope of the curve), and if no additional dose is given, it eventually falls to zero. The diminished blood level of drug after the peak height is reached indicates that the rate of elimination from the bloodstream is greater than the rate of absorption into the circulatory system. Absorption does not terminate after the peak blood level is reached; it may continue for some time. Similarly, the process of drug elimination is con­ tinuous. It begins as soon as the drug first appears in the bloodstream and continues until all of the drug has been eliminated. The positive or negative slope of the curve indicates which process is faster. When the drug leaves the blood, it may be found in various body tissues and cells for which it has an affinity until ultimately it is excreted as such or as drug metabolites in the urine or via some other route (Fig. 5.5). A urinalysis for the drug or its metabolites may be used to indicate the extent of absorption and/ or the rate of elimination. Parameters for Assessment and Comparison of Bioavailability In discussing the important parameters to be considered in the comparative evaluation of the blood level curves following the oral administration of single doses of two formulations of the same drug entity, Cho dos and DiSanto (6) list the following: • The peak height concentration ( Cm.,J • The time of the peak concentration (Tm.,J • The area under the blood (or serum or plasma) concen- tration-time curve (AUC) Using Figure 5.4 as an example, the height of the peak concentration is equivalent to 4.0 mg/mL of drug in the serum, the time of the peak concentration is 2 hours after administration, and the AUC from O to 12 hours is cal­ culated as 21.5 mg/mL x hours. The meaning and use of these parameters are further explained as follows. Peak Height Peak height concentration is the Cmax observed in the blood plasma or serum following a dose of the drug, indicating a slope of zero, meaning the rates of absorp­ tion and elimination are equal. For conventional dosage