906 SECTION 15 | Respiratory Disorders overuse of SABA therapy [more than 1 canister/month], history of psychiatric dis- ease or psychosocial problems, poor medication adherence, lack of a written asthma action plan, and food allergy). During the physical exam, assess vital signs and iden- tify any complicating factors (eg, pneumonia, anaphylaxis) and comorbid conditions that could be causing acute shortness of breath such as inhaled foreign body, heart failure, pulmonary infection, and pulmonary embolism. • Measure lung function testing by PEF or FEV1 before treatment if possible, 1 hour after start of treatment, and then periodically until response is achieved or no fur- ther improvement is evident. Monitor oxygen saturation closely, preferably by pulse oximetry. • Arterial blood gases are typically reserved for patients who are poorly responsive to initial treatment or deteriorating. • Obtain a complete blood count if there are signs of infection (fever and purulent sputum). TREATMENT • Goals of Treatment: The GINA long-term goals for asthma management include (1) to achieve good control of symptoms and maintain normal activity levels, and (2) to minimize future risk of exacerbations, fixed airflow limitation, and side effects. For acute severe asthma, the primary goal is to prevent death by recognizing the signs of deterioration and providing rapid treatment. NONPHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY • Patient education is mandatory to improve medication adherence, self-management skills, and use of healthcare services. • Short-term (approximately 2 weeks) home PEF monitoring can be used to assess treatment response. Longer-term PEF monitoring is generally recommended only for patients with a history of sudden severe asthma exacerbations, difficult to control severe asthma, or poor symptom perception. • Avoidance of known allergenic triggers can improve symptoms, reduce medication use, and decrease BHR. Environmental triggers (eg, animals) should be avoided in sensitive patients, and smokers should be encouraged to quit. • In acute asthma exacerbations, initiate oxygen therapy to achieve an arterial oxygen saturation of 93%–95% in adolescents and adults and 94%–98% in school-aged chil- dren and pregnant women or those with cardiac disease. • Correct dehydration if present; urine specific gravity may help guide therapy in chil- dren when assessment of hydration status is difficult. PHARMACOTHERAPY General Approach • Table 79-1 summarizes GINA recommendations for initial controller treatment in adults and adolescents with persistent asthma. A stepped-care approach is used to manage persistent asthma for all ages. If newly diagnosed, the initial step is based upon levels of impairment and risk, which determine asthma severity. All patients with persistent asthma (mild, moderate, or severe) should be started on inhaled corticosteroid therapy. Therapy is escalated as needed by increasing the ICS dose or adding a second and then a third inhaled controller medication, typically a long - acting β2 adrenergic receptor agonist (LABA) (preferred) or a long- acting muscarinic agonist (LAMA). All patients should have quick -relief reliever therapy available for acute symptoms. Assess disease control 2–6 weeks after the start of therapy and adjust therapy accordingly. Follow-up every 2–3 months thereafter as appropriate. • Figure 79-1 describes the stepwise approach for managing asthma in ages 12 years and older.