558 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS Dinoprostone Vaginal Insert Dinoprostone ( Cervidil, Forest Pharmaceuticals) is a thick, flat, rectangular polymeric slab enclosed in a pouch of a knitted polyester retrieval system. The buff-colored semi­ transparent polymeric hydrogel slab contains 10 mg of dinoprostone. The retrieval system is in the shape of a long knitted tape used to retrieve, or remove, the unit after the dosing interval is complete. The product is designed to release dinoprostone in vivo at a rate of about 0.3 mg/h. The unit contains 10 mg of dinoprostone in 236 mg of a cross-linked polyethylene oxide-urethane polymer slab that measures 29 mm by 9.5 mm and is 0.8 mm thick. When placed in a moist environment, the unit absorbs water, swells, and releases dinoprostone. It is indicated for initiation and/ or continuation of cervical ripening in patients at or near term when there is medical or obstetrical indication for labor induction. The product is dosed at 10 mg of dinoprostone (1 unit) inserted vaginally and removed upon onset of active labor or 12 hours after insertion. After administration, the patient should remain supine for 2 hours but may be ambulatory after that time. This product should be stored in a freezer at -20°C to -l0°C ( -4 °F to 14 °F); it is packaged in foil and is stable in the freezer for 3 years. After opening and upon exposure to humidity, it is hygroscopic, and the release characteris­ tics of the dinoprostone may be altered if it is improperly stored (6). An example is shown in Figure 20.8. NOC 0'!56-it '123-63 Cervidil DJNOPROSTONE I O mg v a g i n a l , n s e r t FIGURE :zo.a. Cervidil (dinoprostone) vaginal insert The poly­ meric slab containing the dinoprostone is encased in a pouch of a knitted polyester delivery and retrieval system. (Courtesy of Forest Pharmaceuticals.) FIGURE :Z0.9. Crinone (progesterone 8% gel). Commercial package contains six single-use, individually wrapped prefilled applicators. Estring A unique method of administering estradiol is through the use of the estradiol vaginal ring (Estring, Pharmacia Corp., A Division of Pfizer) shown in Figures 20.5 and 20.6. The core of the ring contains a reservoir of estradiol, which is released immediately and then at a continuous rate of 75 mg per 24 hours over 90 days. The ring, composed of sil­ icone polymers and barium sulfate, has an outer diameter of 55 mm and a core diameter of 2 mm. The ring is inserted into the upper third of the vaginal vault and is worn con­ tinuously for the treatment of urogenital symptoms associ­ ated with postmenopausal atrophy of the vagina. Crinone Gel Another type of vaginal product with extended action is the bioadhesive vaginal gel Crinone Gel (Wyeth-Ayerst), which contains micronized progesterone and the polymer poly­ carbophil in an oil-in-water emulsion system. The polymer, which is insoluble in water, swells within the vagina and forms a bioadhesive gel coating on the walls of the vagina. This allows the absorption of progesterone through the vaginal tissue over 25 to 50 hours. The product is used to assist in reproduction and is shown in Figure 20.9. I OPHTHALMICS One of the problems associated with the use of ophthalmic solutions is the rapid loss of administered drug because of the blinking of the eye and the flushing effect of lac­ rimal fluids. Up to 80% of an administered dose may be lost through tears and the action of nasolacrimal drain­ age within 5 minutes of installation. Extended periods of therapy may be achieved by formulations that increase the contact time between the medication and the corneal surface. This may be accomplished by the use of agents that increase the viscosity of solutions, by ophthalmic suspensions in which the drug particles slowly dissolve, by