544 SECTIOn Ix Special Topics (A) is 0.66 g of protein per kg body weight (giving a reference intake of 0.825 g of protein/kg body weight, allowing for indi- vidual variation); ∼55 g/d, or 0.825% of energy intake. Average intakes of protein in developed countries are of the order of 80 to 100 g/d, ie, 14% to 15% of energy intake. Because grow- ing children are increasing the protein in the body, they have a proportionally greater requirement than adults and should be in positive nitrogen balance. Even so, the need is relatively small compared with the requirement for protein turnover. In some countries, protein intake is inadequate to meet these requirements, resulting in stunting of growth. There is little or no evidence that athletes and body builders require large amounts of protein; simply consuming more of a normal diet providing about 14% of energy from protein will provide more than enough protein for increased muscle protein synthesis—the main requirement is for an increased energy intake to permit increased protein synthesis. There Is a Loss of Body protein in response to Trauma & Infection One of the metabolic reactions to a major trauma, such as a burn, a broken limb, or surgery, is an increase in the net catab- olism of tissue proteins, both in response to cytokines and glucocorticoid hormones, and as a result of excessive utiliza- tion of threonine and cysteine in the synthesis of acute-phase proteins. As much as 6% to 7% of the total body protein may be lost over 10 days. Prolonged bed rest results in considerable loss of protein because of atrophy of muscles. Protein catabo- lism may be increased in response to cytokines, and without the stimulus of exercise it is not completely replaced. Lost pro- tein is replaced during convalescence, when there is positive nitrogen balance. Again, as in the case of athletes, a normal diet is adequate to permit this replacement protein synthesis. The requirement Is not Just for protein, but for Specific Amino Acids Not all proteins are nutritionally equivalent. More of some is needed to maintain nitrogen balance than others because dif- ferent proteins contain different amounts of the various amino acids. The body’s requirement is for amino acids in the correct proportions to replace tissue proteins. The amino acids can be divided into two groups: essential and nonessential. There are nine essential or indispensable amino acids, which can- not be synthesized in the body: histidine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, tryptophan, and valine. If one of these is lacking or inadequate, then regardless of the total intake of protein, it will not be possible to maintain nitrogen balance since there will not be enough of that amino acid for protein synthesis. Two amino acids, cysteine and tyrosine, can be synthesized in the body, but only from essential amino acid precursors— cysteine from methionine and tyrosine from phenylalanine. The dietary intakes of cysteine and tyrosine thus affect the requirements for methionine and phenylalanine. The remaining 11 amino acids in proteins are considered to be nonessential or dispensable since they can be synthesized as long as there is enough total protein in the diet. If one of these amino acids is omitted from the diet, nitrogen balance can still be main- tained. However, only three amino acids, alanine, aspartate, and glutamate, can be considered to be truly dispensable; they are synthesized by transamination of common meta- bolic intermediates (pyruvate, oxaloacetate, and ketoglutarate, respectively). The remaining amino acids are considered as nonessential, but under some circumstances the requirement may outstrip the capacity for their synthesis. SUMMARY ■ Digestion involves hydrolyzing food molecules into smaller molecules for absorption through the gastrointestinal epithelium. Polysaccharides are absorbed as monosaccharides, triacylglycerols as 2-monoacylglycerols, fatty acids and glycerol, and proteins as amino acids and small peptides. ■ Digestive disorders arise as a result of (1) enzyme deficiency, eg, lactase and sucrase; (2) malabsorption, eg, of glucose and galactose as a result of defects in the Na+-glucose cotransporter (SGLT 1); (3) absorption of unhydrolyzed polypeptides leading to immune responses, eg, as in celiac disease; and (4) precipitation of cholesterol from bile as gallstones. ■ In addition to water, the diet must provide metabolic fuels (carbohydrate and fat) for body growth and activity, protein for synthesis of tissue proteins, fiber for bulk in the intestinal contents, minerals for specific metabolic functions (Chapter 44), polyunsaturated fatty acids of the n−3 and n−6 families, and vitamins-organic compounds needed in small amounts for other essential functions (see Chapter 44). ■ Undernutrition occurs in two extreme forms: marasmus, in adults and children, and kwashiorkor in children. Chronic illness can also lead to undernutrition (cachexia) as a result of hypermetabolism. ■ Overnutrition leads to excess energy intake and is associated with chronic noncommunicable diseases such as obesity, type 2 diabetes, atherosclerosis, cancer, and hypertension. ■ Twenty different amino acids are required for protein synthesis, of which nine are essential in the human diet. The quantity of protein required can be determined by studies of nitrogen balance and is affected by protein quality—the amounts of essential amino acids present in dietary proteins compared with the amounts required for tissue protein synthesis. REFERENCES Bender DA: Introduction to Nutrition and Metabolism, 5th ed. CRC Press, 2014. Bender DA, Bender AE: Nutrition: A Reference Handbook. Oxford University Press, 1997. Fuller MF, Garllick PJ: Human amino acid requirements: can the controversy be resolved? Ann Rev Nutr 1994;14:217. Geissler C, Powers HJ (editors): Human Nutrition, 12th ed. Elsevier, 2010. Gibney MJ, Lanham-New S, Cassidy A, et al: Introduction to Human Nutrition, The Nutrition Society Textbook Series, 2nd ed. Wiley–Blackwell, 2009. Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library