colorectal cancer, stomach cancer, pancreatic cancer, and topical use in basal cell cancer of the skin. The mechanism of action includes inhibition of the enzyme TS by the deoxyri- bose monophosphate metabolite, 5-FdUMP. The triphos- phate metabolite is incorporated into DNA and the ribose triphosphate into RNA. These incorporations into growing chains result in inhibition of synthesis and function of DNA and RNA. Resistance can occur as a result of increased ex- pression of TS, decreased levels of reduced folate substrate 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate, or increased levels of dihy- dropyrimidine dehydrogenase. Dihydropyrimidine dehydro- genase is the main enzyme responsible for 5-FU catabolism. Bioavailability following oral absorption is erratic. Administration of 5-FU by IV yields high drug concentra- tions in bone marrow and liver. The drug does distribute into the central nervous system (CNS). Significant drug interac- tions include enhanced toxicity and antitumor activity of 5-FU following pretreatment with leucovorin. Toxicities in- clude dose-limiting myelosuppression, mucositis, diarrhea, and hand–foot syndrome (numbness, pain, erythema, dry- ness, rash, swelling, increased pigmentation, nail changes, pruritus of the hands and feet). CAPECITABINE (XELODA) The drug is available in a 150- and 500-mg tablets for oral use. This drug is a fluoropyrimidine carbamate prodrug form of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). It is used to treat breast can- cer and colorectal cancer. The drug is converted to 5-FU by the enzyme thymidine phosphorylase following esterase ac- tivity to hydrolyze the carbamate moiety and deamination. Capecitabine is readily absorbed by the GI tract, and peak plasma levels of 5-FU occur about 2 hours after oral admin- istration. Indications, drug interactions, and toxicities are equivalent to those of 5-FU. CYTARABINE (CYTOSINE ARABINOSIDE, ARA-C, CYTOSAR-U, TARABINE) The drug is available in 100-, 500-, 1,000-, and 2,000-mg multidose vials for IV use. Cytarabine is used in the treat- ment of acute myelogenous leukemia and CML. This drug is a deoxycytidine analog originally isolated from the sponge Cryptothethya crypta. It is active following intracel- lular activation to the nucleotide metabolite ara-CTP. The resulting ara-CTP is incorporated into DNA resulting in chain termination and inhibition of DNA synthesis and function. Resistance can occur because of decreased activa- tion or transport and increased catabolic breakdown. Metabolic breakdown within the GI tract leads to poor bioavailability. The drug distributes rapidly into tissues and total body water with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels reaching 20% to 40% of those in plasma. Cytidine deami- nase is the primary catabolic enzyme involved in the inacti- vation of cytarabine. Drug interactions include antagonism of the effects of gentamicin, decreasing the oral bioavail- ability of digoxin, as well as enhancing the cytotoxicity of various alkylating agents, cisplatin, and ionizing radiation. Pretreatment with methotrexate enhances the formation of ara-CTP metabolites resulting in enhanced cytotoxicity. 380 Wilson and Gisvold’s Textbook of Organic Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry Figure 10.10 Structures of folic acid and antifolate anticancer drugs.