Carbohydrate metabolism 198 Treatment of hypoglycaemia Milder cases can be managed with oral glucose-containing preparations. Severe hypoglycaemia should be treated by urgent intravenous administration of 10–20 mL of at least 10 per cent (and in adults 20 per cent) glucose solution. Some patients may need to be maintained on a glucose infusion until the cause has been established and treated. Intramuscular glucagon 1 mg can also be used if intravenous access is a problem, but this should not be given in cases of insulinoma. An insulinoma should be removed surgically. If this is contraindicated for clinical reasons, diazoxide may maintain normoglycaemia. Laboratory tests Estimation of plasma or blood glucose Glucose is measured in the laboratory by specific enzymatic methods. The supply of glucose to cells depends on extracellular (plasma) concentrations. The measurement of plasma glucose concentrations is preferable to that of whole blood, which is now rarely used. Blood cells, with very low glucose concentrations, ‘dilute’ glucose, giving results 10–15 per cent lower than in plasma, the actual amount depending on the haematocrit. Capillary blood from a finger prick is used for home glucose monitoring and the results for such samples may fall between those of venous whole blood and venous plasma. Unless plasma is separated from the blood cells within about an hour of collection, the whole blood sample must be mixed with an inhibitor of glycolysis, such as ﬂ uoride. This helps prevent an in vitro fall in the plasma glucose concentration as glycolysis continues, which may result in pseudohypoglycaemia. Urinary glucose Enzyme reagent strips specific for glucose, such as those that use a glucose oxidase method, best detect glycosuria. The directions for use are supplied with the strips. Glycosuria may be due to: ● diabetes mellitus, ● glucose-containing infusion, ● renal glycosuria, which may be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait or in Fanconi’s syndrome, ● pregnancy. False-negative results may occur: ● if the urine contains large amounts of ascorbic acid after the ingestion of therapeutic doses, ● after the injection of tetracyclines, which contain ascorbic acid as a preservative. False-positive results may occur if the urine container is contaminated with detergent. Reducing substances in the urine can be detected using copper-containing reagents such as those incorporated in Clinitest tablets. These are rarely used now in the management of diabetes mellitus; however, in the neonatal period, the ﬁ nding of other reducing substances may suggest an inborn error of metabolism, such as galactosaemia (see Chapter 27). It is therefore important to use this test, rather than one that is speciﬁ c for glucose, in screening for such conditions. Non-glucose-reducing substances are identiﬁ ed by chromatography and speciﬁ c tests. The signiﬁ cance of a Clinitest-positive result varies with the substances, which are as follows. ● Glucose. ● Glucuronates are relatively common urinary reducing substances. Numerous drugs, such as salicylates and their metabolites, are excreted in the urine after conjugation with glucuronate in the liver. ● Galactose is found in the urine in galactosaemia. ● Fructose may appear in the urine after very large oral doses of sucrose, or after excessive fruit ingestion, but usually fructosuria is due to one of two rare inborn errors of metabolism, both transmitted as autosomal recessive disorders: – essential fructosuria is usually a benign condition (hepatic fructokinase deﬁ ciency), – hereditary fructose intolerance is characterized by hypoglycaemia that may lead to death in infancy. ● Lactose. Lactosuria may occur in: – late pregnancy and during lactation, – lactase deﬁ ciency. ● Pentoses. Pentosuria is very rare. It may occur in: – alimentary pentosuria, after excessive ingestion of fruits such as cherries and grapes – the pentoses are arabinose and xylose, – essential pentosuria, a rare recessive disorder due to L-xylulose reductase deﬁ ciency, characterized by the excretion of xylose – it is usually benign. ● Homogentisic acid appears in the urine in the rare inborn error alkaptonuria. It is usually recognizable because it forms a blackish precipitate in urine on standing. Urea and creatinine may give weak positive results at high concentrations.