the usual systemic routes may decrease overall coronary blood flow (and myocardial oxygen consumption) if cardiac output is reduced due to decreased venous return. The reduction in oxygen demand is the major mechanism for the relief of effort angina. B. Nitrate Effects in Variant Angina Nitrates benefit patients with variant angina by relaxing the smooth muscle of the epicardial coronary arteries and relieving coronary artery spasm. C. Nitrate Effects in Acute Coronary Syndromes Nitrates are also useful in the treatment of the acute coronary syndrome of unstable angina, but the precise mechanism for their beneficial effects is not clear. Because both increased coronary vascular tone and increased myocardial oxygen demand can precipitate rest angina in these patients, nitrates may exert their beneficial effects both by dilating the epicardial coronary arteries and by simultaneously reducing myocardial oxygen demand. As previously noted, nitroglycerin also decreases platelet aggregation, and this effect may be important in acute coronary syndrome. Clinical Use of Nitrates Some of the forms of nitroglycerin and its congeners and their doses are listed in Table 12–3. Because of its rapid onset of action (1–3 minutes), sublingual nitroglycerin is the most frequently used agent for the immediate treatment of angina. Because its duration of action is short (not exceeding 20–30 minutes), it is not suitable for maintenance therapy. The onset of action of intravenous nitroglycerin is also rapid (minutes), but its hemodynamic effects are quickly reversed when the infusion is stopped. Clinical use of intravenous nitroglycerin is therefore restricted to the treatment of severe, recurrent rest angina. Slowly absorbed preparations of nitroglycerin include a buccal form, oral preparations, and several transdermal forms. These formulations have been shown to provide blood concentrations for long periods but, as noted above, this may lead to the development of tolerance. TABLE 12–3 Nitrate and nitrite drugs used in the treatment of angina. Drug Dose Duration of Action Short­acting Nitroglycerin, sublingual 0.15–1.2 mg 10–30 minutes Isosorbide dinitrate, sublingual 2.5–5 mg 10–60 minutes Amyl nitrite, inhalant (obsolete) 0.18–0.3 mL 3–5 minutes Long­acting Nitroglycerin, oral sustained­action 6.5–13 mg per 6–8 hours 6–8 hours Nitroglycerin, 2% ointment, transdermal 1–1.5 inches per 4 hours 3–6 hours Nitroglycerin, slow­release, buccal 1–2 mg per 4 hours 3–6 hours Nitroglycerin, slow­release patch, transdermal 10–25 mg per 24 hours (one patch per day) 8–10 hours Isosorbide dinitrate, sublingual 2.5–10 mg per 2 hours 1.5–2 hours Isosorbide dinitrate, oral 10–60 mg per 4–6 hours 4–6 hours Isosorbide dinitrate, chewable oral 5–10 mg per 2–4 hours 2–3 hours