Toxicity of Diuretics In the treatment of hypertension, the most common adverse effect of diuretics (except for potassium­sparing diuretics) is potassium depletion. Although mild degrees of hypokalemia are tolerated well by many patients, hypokalemia may be hazardous in persons taking digitalis, those who have chronic arrhythmias, or those with acute myocardial infarction or left ventricular dysfunction. Potassium loss is coupled to reabsorption of sodium, and restriction of dietary sodium intake therefore minimizes potassium loss. Diuretics may also cause magnesium depletion, impair glucose tolerance, and increase serum lipid concentrations. Diuretics increase uric acid concentrations and may precipitate gout. The use of low doses minimizes these adverse metabolic effects without impairing the antihypertensive action. Potassium­sparing diuretics may produce hyperkalemia, particularly in patients with renal insufficiency and those taking ace inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers; spironolactone (a steroid) is associated with gynecomastia. INHIBITORS OF ANGIOTENSIN Renin, angiotensin, and aldosterone play important roles in some people with essential hypertension. Approximately 20% of patients with essential hypertension have inappropriately low and 20% have inappropriately high plasma renin activity. Blood pressure of patients with high­renin hypertension responds well to drugs that interfere with the system, supporting a role for excess renin and angiotensin in this population. Mechanism & Sites of Action Renin release from the kidney cortex is stimulated by reduced renal arterial pressure, sympathetic neural stimulation, and reduced sodium delivery or increased sodium concentration at the distal renal tubule (see Chapter 17). Renin acts upon angiotensinogen to yield the inactive precursor decapeptide angiotensin I. Angiotensin I is then converted, primarily by endothelial ACE, to the arterial vasoconstrictor octapeptide angiotensin II (Figure 11–5), which is in turn converted in the adrenal gland to angiotensin III. Angiotensin II can also be converted to angiotensin III in the brain by the enzyme aminopeptidase A. Brain angiotensin III exerts tonic control on blood pressure and is implicated in development of hypertension in animals. Angiotensin II has vasoconstrictor and sodium­retaining activity. Angiotensin II and III both stimulate aldosterone release. Angiotensin may contribute to maintaining high vascular resistance in hypertensive states associated with high plasma renin activity, such as renal arterial stenosis, some types of intrinsic renal disease, and malignant hypertension, as well as in essential hypertension after treatment with sodium restriction, diuretics, or vasodilators. However, even in low­renin hypertensive states, these drugs can lower blood pressure (see below). FIGURE 11–5 Sites of action of drugs that interfere with the renin­angiotensin­aldosterone system. ACE, angiotensin­converting enzyme; ARBs, angiotensin receptor blockers.