blockers with long half­lives provide smoother blood pressure control and are more appropriate for treatment of chronic hypertension. Intravenous nicardipine and clevidipine are available for the treatment of hypertension when oral therapy is not feasible; parenteral verapamil and diltiazem can also be used for the same indication. Nicardipine is typically infused at rates of 2–15 mg/h. Clevidipine is infused starting at 1–2 mg/h and progressing to 4–6 mg/h. It has a rapid onset of action and has been used in acute hypertension occurring during surgery. Oral short­acting nifedipine has been used in emergency management of severe hypertension. DRUGS THAT ALTER SYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM FUNCTION In many patients, hypertension is initiated and sustained at least in part by sympathetic neural activation. In patients with moderate to severe hypertension, drug regimens that include an agent that inhibits function of the sympathetic nervous system may be needed for optimal blood pressure control. Drugs in this group are classified according to the site at which they impair the sympathetic reflex arc (see Figure 11–2). This neuroanatomic classification explains prominent differences in cardiovascular effects of drugs and allows the clinician to predict interactions of these drugs with one another and with other drugs. The subclasses of sympathoplegic drugs exhibit different patterns of potential toxicity. Drugs that lower blood pressure by actions on the central nervous system tend to cause sedation and mental depression and may produce disturbances of sleep, including nightmares. Drugs that act by inhibiting transmission through autonomic ganglia (ganglion blockers) produce toxicity from inhibition of parasympathetic regulation, in addition to profound sympathetic blockade, and are no longer used. Drugs that act chiefly by reducing release of norepinephrine from sympathetic nerve endings cause effects that are similar to those of surgical sympathectomy, including inhibition of ejaculation, and hypotension that is increased by upright posture and after exercise. Drugs that block postsynaptic adrenoceptors produce a more selective spectrum of effects depending on the class of receptor to which they bind. Finally, one should note that all of the agents that lower blood pressure by altering sympathetic function can elicit compensatory effects through mechanisms that are not dependent on adrenergic nerves. Thus, the antihypertensive effect of any of these agents used alone may be limited by retention of sodium by the kidney and expansion of blood volume. For this reason, sympathoplegic antihypertensive drugs are most effective when used concomitantly with a diuretic. CENTRALLY ACTING SYMPATHOPLEGIC DRUGS Centrally acting sympathoplegic drugs were once widely used in the treatment of hypertension. With the exception of clonidine, these drugs are rarely used today. Mechanisms & Sites of Action These agents reduce sympathetic outflow from vasomotor centers in the brain stem but allow these centers to retain or even increase their sensitivity to baroreceptor control. Accordingly, the antihypertensive and toxic actions of these drugs are generally less dependent on posture than are the effects of drugs that act directly on peripheral sympathetic neurons. Methyldopa (L­α­methyl­3,4­dihydroxyphenylalanine) is an analog of L­dopa and is converted to α­methyldopamine and α­methylnorepinephrine; this pathway directly parallels the synthesis of norepinephrine from dopa illustrated in Figure 6–5. Alpha­methylnorepinephrine is stored in adrenergic nerve vesicles, where it stoichiometrically replaces norepinephrine, and is released by nerve stimulation to interact with postsynaptic adrenoceptors. However, this replacement of norepinephrine by a false transmitter in peripheral neurons is not responsible for methyldopa’s antihypertensive effect, because the α­methylnorepinephrine released is an effective agonist at the α adrenoceptors that mediate peripheral sympathetic constriction of arterioles and venules. In fact, methyldopa’s antihypertensive action appears to be due to stimulation of central α adrenoceptors by α­methylnorepinephrine or α­methyldopamine. The antihypertensive action of clonidine, a 2­imidazoline derivative, was discovered in the course of testing the drug for use as a nasal decongestant. After intravenous injection, clonidine produces a brief rise in blood pressure followed by more prolonged hypotension. The pressor response is due to direct stimulation of α adrenoceptors in arterioles. The drug is classified as a partial agonist at α receptors because it also inhibits pressor effects of other α agonists. The hypotensive effect of clonidine is exerted at α adrenoceptors in the medulla of the brain. In animals, the hypotensive effect of clonidine is d b l d i i i f i Cl idi d h i d i h i l i i bl d