I VAGINAL ADMINISTRATION lntravaginal Drug Delivery System Vaginal administration of drugs, especially hormones, has several advantages, including self-insertion and removal, continuous drug administration at an effective dose level, and good patient compliance. The continuous release and local absorption of drug minimize systemic toxicity that may result from oral peak-and-valley drug administration. In a polymeric vaginal drug delivery system, such as a resilient medicated vaginal ring, shown in Figures 20.5 and 20.6 or a copper-containing intrauterine contraceptive device, the drug may be uniformly distributed throughout the polymeric matrix. Upon administration and when in contact with vaginal fluids, the drug will slowly dissolve and migrate out of the device. Drug inside the device will diffuse toward the surface along a concentration gradient, resulting in a long-acting drug delivery system. Mirena (levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system) consists of a T-shaped polyethylene frame with a steroid reservoir (hormone elastomer core) around the vertical stem. It is designed to prevent pregnancy for up to 5 years ( 4). Intrauterine Progesterone Drug Delivery System The Progestasert system shown in Figure 20. 7 slowly releases an average of 60 mg of progesterone per day for 1 year after insertion. The continuous release of progesterone into the uterine cavity provides local rather than systemic action. Two hypotheses for the contraceptive action have been offered: progesterone-induced inhibition of sperm capacity ,,'OC OOIJ.21so.J6 1 Unit Rx only Estring• estradiol vaginal nng FIGURE :zo.s. Estring polymeric vaginal drug delivery system. C HAPTE R 20 Novel Dosage Forms and Drug Delivery Technologies 557 FIGURE :Z0.6. The Estring (Pharmacia & Upjohn), a polymeric vaginal drug delivery system. (Courtesy of Pharmacia & Upjohn.) for survival and alteration of the uterine milieu to prevent nidation. The intrauterine device contains 38 mg of pro­ gesterone, a much smaller amount than would be taken by other routes of administration over the same period for the same purpose. The intrauterine device is replaced annually for the maintenance of contraception (5). The Progestasert provides contraception without the need for daily self-medication and has the advantages of (a) using a natural hormone; (b) containing no estrogens; (c) using a T-shaped delivery device to ensure comfort, safety, and retention, which minimizes mechanically induced irri­ tation; and (d) confining the hormonal action to the uterus. The device contains the progesterone suspended in silicone oil; barium sulfate is added to make it radiopaque. The ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) membrane surrounding the drug core controls the rate of drug release. Titanium dioxide is added to the EVA for a white color. At the end of a year, the device will contain approximately 14 mg of progesterone, the excess being required to maintain the thermodynamic activity of the drug reservoir. ,,.... ) !:\ Drug reservoir Ji t•i--- Rate-controlling I membraae --- Monofilament thread FIGURE :Z0.7. Schematic of the Progestasert intrauterine drug delivery system.