135 17 eXtraction of plant material 136 separation and isolation of constituents 137 characteriZation of isolated compounds 144 bioGenetic investiGations 144 tracer techniQues 144 isolated orGans, tissues and cells 146 Grafts 147 mutant strains 147 General methods associated with the phytochemical investigation of herbal products Before about 1800 only slow progress was made in phytochemistry. A few compounds such as cane-sugar, starch, camphor and benzoic acid had long been known, as their preparation was extremely simple; also complex mixtures such as fats, fixed oils, volatile oils, tars and res- ins had been prepared and used, although virtually nothing was known of their composition. The early scientific workers in the phytochemical field failed to appreciate the extreme complexity of the materials they were trying to investigate and almost entirely lacked the techniques necessary for real progress. Many hundreds of plants were burnt to yield ashes and these early investigators were disappointed to find no significant differences between the ashes of poisonous and those of non-poisonous plants. Expression, aqueous extraction and evaporation had long been used for the preparation of sugar from sugar-cane and the French apothecary Nicholas Leméry (1645–1715) extended the use of extraction processes and made use of alcohol as a solvent. Robert Boyle (1627–91) disposed of the ancient theory of Aristotle that mat- ter was composed of four elements, and although he never isolated an alkaloid, he was obviously moving in the right direction when he treated opium with potassium carbonate and alcohol. In 1747 sucrose was isolated from many plants, including sugarbeet, by the German apothecary A. S. Marggraf (1709–80). K. W. Scheele (1742–86) was highly successful in the phytochemical field and isolated citric, gallic, malic, oxalic, tartaric and prussic acids. In the nineteenth century progress became more rapid. In 1803 nar- cotine, the first alkaloid, was isolated; morphine, strychnine, emetine and many others followed rapidly. Between 1813 and 1823 Chevreul elucidated the chemical nature of fats and fixed oils. Until well into the middle of the twentieth century the main emphasis in natural- product chemistry remained the isolation and structure determination of a wide variety of compounds. At this point it became apparent that the principal structural types commonly found in plants had been largely elucidated. Indeed, by this time the attention of natural-product chemists was turning to the elucidation of the actual biosynthetic path- ways found in the plant. Such studies were made possible by the intro- duction of new techniques of separation and analysis. This emphasis has continued until today, when most of the major pathways, including stereochemical aspects, have been studied in some depth. Interest has now moved on to plant biochemistry involving enzymatic and DNA studies related to the biosynthesis of natural products. There has also developed a renewed interest in the patterns of occurrence of compounds in plants (comparative phytochemistry). Not all the chemical compounds elaborated by plants are of equal interest to the pharmacognosist. Until relatively recently the so-called ‘active’ principles were frequently alkaloids or specific glycosides usually with pronounced pharmacological properties; these there- fore received special attention, and in large measure constituted the principal plant drugs of the allopathic system of medicine. It is now realized that many other constituents of plants, particularly those asso- ciated with herbal medicine, have medicinal properties which manifest themselves in more subtle and less dramatic ways than the obviously poisonous plants. This has considerably widened the scope of plant metabolites considered worthy of more detailed investigation. Other groups such as carbohydrates, fats and proteins are of dietetic impor- tance, and many such as starches and gums are used in pharmacy but lack any marked pharmacological action. Substances, such as calcium oxalate, silica, lignin and colouring matters, may be of assistance in the identification of drugs and the detection of adulteration. As a result of the recent interest in the plant kingdom as a potential source of new drugs, strategies for the fractionation of plant extracts based on biological activity rather than on a particular class of com- pound, have been developed. The chemical examination follows after the isolation of the active fraction.