148 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS aqueous solutions or as suspensions and are adminis­ tered in relatively small volumes, 2 mL or less. Insulin is an example of a drug administered by the subcutaneous route. Subcutaneous injections are generally given in the forearm, upper arm, thigh, or buttocks. If the patient is to receive frequent injections, it is best to alternate injection sites to reduce tissue irritation. After injection, the drug comes into the immediate vicinity of blood capillaries and permeates them by diffusion or filtration. The capillary wall is an example of a membrane that behaves as a lipid pore barrier, with lipid-soluble substances penetrating the membrane at rates varying with their oil-water parti­ tion coefficients. Lipid-insoluble (generally more water­ soluble) drugs penetrate the capillary membrane at rates that appear to be inversely related to their molecular size, with smaller molecules penetrating much more rapidly than larger ones. All substances, whether lipid soluble or not, cross the capillary membrane much more rapidly than other body membranes. The blood supply to the site of injection is an important factor in considering the rate of drug absorption; consequently, the closer capillaries are to the site of injection, the more prompt is the drug's entrance into the circulation. Also, the more the capillar­ ies, the more surface area for absorption and the faster the rate of absorption. Some substances modify the rate of drug absorption from a subcutaneous site of injection. The addition of a vasoconstrictor to the injection formula­ tion (or its prior injection) will generally diminish the rate of drug absorption by causing constriction of the blood vessels in the area of injection and thereby reducing blood flow and the capacity for absorption. This principle is used in the administration of local anesthetics by use of the vasoconstrictor epinephrine. Conversely, vasodilators may be used to enhance subcutaneous absorption by increas­ ing blood flow to the area. Physical exercise can also influ­ ence the absorption of drug from an injection site. Diabetic patients who rotate subcutaneous injection sites and then do physical exercise such as jogging must realize that the onset of insulin activity may be influenced by the selected site of administration. Because of the movement of the leg and blood circulation to it during running, the absorption of insulin from a thigh injection site can be expected to be faster than from an abdominal injection site. Intramuscular Injections Intramuscular injections are performed deep into the skel­ etal muscles, generally the gluteal or lumbar muscles. The selected site is where the danger of hitting a nerve or blood vessel is minimal. Aqueous or oleaginous solutions or suspensions may be used intramuscularly. Certain drugs, because of their inherent low solubility, provide sustained drug action after an intramuscular injection. For instance, one deep intramuscular injection of a suspension of peni­ cillin G benzathine results in effective blood levels of the drug for 7 to 10 days. The addition of the decanoate ester decreases the solubility of haloperidol and, consequently, extends haloperidol's t½ from 18 hours orally to 3 weeks, an advantage in antipsychotic drug therapy. Drugs that are irritating to subcutaneous tissue are often administered intramuscularly. Also, greater volumes (2 to 5 mL) may be administered intramuscularly than subcutaneously. When a volume greater than 5 mL is to be injected, it is frequently administered in divided doses to two injection sites. Injection sites are best rotated when a patient is receiving repeated injections over time. Intravenous Injections In the intravenous administration of drugs, an aqueous solution is injected directly into the vein at a rate com­ mensurate with efficiency, safety, comfort to the patient, and the desired duration of drug response. Drugs may be administered intravenously as a single, small-volume injection or as a large-volume slow intravenous drip infu­ sion (as is common following surgery). Intravenous injec­ tion allows the desired blood level of drug to be achieved in an optimal and quantitative manner. Intravenous injec­ tions are usually made into the veins of the forearm and are especially useful in emergencies when immediate drug response is desired. It is essential that the drug be maintained in solution after injection and not be pre­ cipitated within the circulatory system, an event that might produce emboli. Because of a fear of the development of pulmonary embolism, oleaginous vehicles are not usually intravenously administered. However, an intravenous fat emulsion is used for patients receiving parenteral nutrition whose caloric requirements cannot be met by glucose. It may be administered either through a peripheral vein or a central venous catheter at a distinct rate to help prevent untoward reactions. lntradermal Injections Intradermal injections are administered into the corium of the skin, usually in volumes of about 0.1 mL. Common sites for the injection are the arm and the back. The injec­ tions are frequently performed as diagnostic measures, as in tuberculin and allergy testing. Epicutaneous Route Drugs are administered topically, or applied to the skin, for their action at the site of application or for systemic drug effects. Drug absorption via the skin is enhanced if the drug substance is in solution, if it has a favorable lipid-water partition coefficient, and if it is not an electrolyte. Drugs that are absorbed enter the skin by way of the pores, sweat glands, hair follicles, sebaceous glands, and other anatomic structures of the skin's surface. Because blood capillaries lie just below the epidermal cells, a drug that penetrates the skin and is able to traverse the capillary wall finds ready access to the general circulation. Among the few drugs applied to the skin surface for per­ cutaneous absorption and systemic action are nitroglycerin