1Assumes that patient is consuming approximately 75 g carbohydrate at breakfast, 60 g at lunch, and 90 g at dinner. 2The dose of rapid­acting insulin analogs can be raised by 1 or 2 U if extra carbohydrate (15–30 g) is ingested or if premeal blood glucose is >170 mg/dL. The rapid­ acting insulin analogs can be mixed in the same syringe with NPH insulin. 3Insulin glargine or insulin detemir must be given as a separate injection. TABLE 41–8 Examples of intensive insulin regimens using rapid­acting insulin analogs (insulin lispro, aspart, or glulisine) and NPH, or insulin detemir, glargine, or degludec in a 70­kg man with type 1 diabetes.1–3 Prebreakfast Prelunch Predinner Bedtime Rapid­acting insulin analog 5 U 4 U 6 U — NPH insulin 3 U 3 U 2 U 8–9 U or Rapid­acting insulin analog 5 U 4 U 6 U — Insulin glargine or degludec — — — 15–16 U Insulin detemir 6–7 U — — 8–9 U The currently available closed­loop systems enable patients to better achieve glycemic targets with reduced rates of hypoglycemia. These systems should be offered to most patients with type 1 diabetes. B . Type 2 Diabetes Normalization of glucose levels can occur with weight loss and improved insulin sensitivity in the obese patient with type 2 diabetes. A combination of caloric restriction and increased exercise is necessary if a weight reduction program is to be successful. Understanding the long­term consequences of poorly controlled diabetes may motivate some patients to lose weight. For selected patients, medical or surgical options should be considered. Orlistat, phentermine/topiramate, lorcaserin (removed from US market in February 2020 due to increased occurrence of cancer), naltrexone plus extended­release bupropion, high­dose liraglutide, and semaglutide are approved weight loss medications for use in combination with diet and exercise. Bariatric surgery (Roux­en­Y, gastric banding, gastric sleeve, biliopancreatic diversion/duodenal switch) typically results in significant weight loss and can result in remission of the diabetes. Nonobese patients with type 2 diabetes frequently have increased visceral adiposity—the so­called metabolically obese, normal weight patient. There is less emphasis on weight loss in such patients, but exercise is important. Multiple medications may be required to achieve glycemic control (Figure 41–6) in patients with type 2 diabetes. Unless there is a contraindication, medical therapy should be initiated with intensive lifestyle interventions (diet and exercise), diabetes self­management education, and metformin. If glycemic targets are no longer achieved with metformin monotherapy, a second agent is added. Options include sulfonylureas, repaglinide or nateglinide, pioglitazone, GLP­1 receptor agonists, dual GIP/GLP1 receptor agonist, DPP­4 inhibitors, SGLT2 inhibitors, and insulin. In the choice of the second agent, consideration should be given to efficacy of the agent, hypoglycemic risk, effect on weight, presence of cardiovascular disease or renal disease, adverse effects, and cost. The DPP­4 inhibitors and SGLT2 inhibitors are of moderate efficacy and all other agents are of high efficacy. Sulfonylureas and insulins have increased risk of hypoglycemia. Sulfonylureas, insulin, and pioglitazone cause weight gain. Metformin and DPP­4 inhibitors are weight neutral, whereas GLP­1 and GIP/GLP1 receptor agonists and SGLT2 inhibitors cause weight loss. The GLP­1 receptor agonists, the SGLT2 inhibitors, and pioglitazone have cardiovascular benefits and the SGLT2 inhibitors delay progression of diabetic nephropathy. The major risk factors include lactic acidosis with metformin; fracture risk, heart failure, and possible bladder cancer with pioglitazone; GI side effects and