Hyperglycaemia and diabetes mellitus 187 recommended if further information is required. Insulin requirements vary in patients with type 1 diabetes. For example, the dose may need to be increased during any illness or during pregnancy and reduced if there is increased activity or meals are missed. In patients with type 2 diabetes, plasma glucose concentrations may be controlled by diet, associated with weight reduction, and increased physical activity, but insulin may be required during periods of stress or pregnancy. In this group insulin secretion can be stimulated by the sulphonylurea drugs, such as gliclazide, glipizide, glibenclamide or glimepiride. Biguanides, usually metformin, can also be used and are particularly useful in obese patients. Metformin decreases intestinal glucose absorption and hepatic gluconeogenesis as well as increasing tissue insulin sensitivity. Metformin can inhibit oxidative phosphorylation, which can, under certain circumstances, lead to lactic acid accumulation. Acarbose delays post-prandial absorption of glucose by inhibiting a-glucosidase. Other oral agents are the thiazolidinediones or ‘glitazones’, for example rosiglitazone and pioglitazone, which activate g-peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors and which can reduce insulin resistance by a number of metabolic pathways, some of which involve increasing the transcription of nuclear proteins that control free fatty acid and tissue glucose uptake. Repaglinide is a meglitinide that increases insulin release from pancreatic b-cells and enhances tissue insulin sensitivity. The incretins are gastrointestinal hormones that increase insulin release from the pancreas after eating, for example glucagon-like peptide (GLP-1) and gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP). They are rapidly inactivated by the enzyme dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP- 4). Incretin mimetics such as exenatide or liraglutide or DPP-4 inhibitors such as sitagliptin, vildagliptin or saxagliptin are being used in type 2 diabetes mellitus.. It is now recognized that diabetes mellitus is not just a glucose disorder. It is important also to optimize abnormal plasma lipids (see Chapter 13) and correct hypertension, particularly if there is microalbuminuria or proteinuria (see Chapter 19). Monitoring of diabetes mellitus Glycosuria Glycosuria can be defined as a concentration of urinary glucose detectable using relatively insensitive, but specific, screening tests. These tests often depend on the action of an enzyme, such as glucose oxidase, incorporated into a diagnostic strip. Usually, the proximal tubular cells reabsorb most of the glucose in the glomerular filtrate. Glycosuria, as defined above, occurs only when the plasma, and therefore glomerular filtrate, concentrations exceed the tubular reabsorptive capacity. This may be because the plasma and glomerular filtrate concentrations are more than about 10 mmol/L, and therefore the normal tubular reabsorptive capacity is significantly exceeded. Very rarely, if the glomerular filtration rate is much reduced, there may be no glycosuria despite plasma glucose concentrations more than 10 mmol/L. A diagnosis of diabetes mellitus should never be made on the basis of glycosuria. Blood glucose Blood glucose concentrations may be measured using glucose testing reagent strips. The colour change of the strip can be assessed visually or by using a portable glucose meter and the reaction often involves an enzyme determination of glucose, for example glucose oxidase. Meters should ideally be overseen by laboratory staff expert in point of care testing (see Chapter 30). Although the measurement of blood glucose concentrations involves the discomfort of several skin punctures, many motivated patients are able to adjust their insulin dose more accurately based on these results than on those obtained by testing their urine. This method of testing is also useful in the detection of hypoglycaemia. For patients who do not like blood testing, urinary glucose testing can be used, but of course cannot detect hypoglycaemia and is dependent on the renal glucose threshold. Glycated haemoglobin Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) is formed by non- enzymatic glycation of haemoglobin and is dependent on the mean plasma glucose concentrations and on the lifespan of the red cell; falsely low values may be found in patients with haemolytic disease. Measurement of blood HbA1c may not reveal potentially dangerous short-term swings and nor does HbA1c detect hypoglycaemic episodes and thus plasma glucose estimations may also be useful. This was expressed as a percentage of total blood haemoglobin concentration and gives a retrospective assessment of the mean plasma glucose concentration during the preceding 6–8 weeks. The higher the glycated haemoglobin, the poorer the mean diabetic or glycaemic control. Glycated haemoglobin used to be expressed in percentage units but now is expressed as mmol/mol