meals glucose control, and management of glycemic excursions that occur with exercise. Software assists the patient in calculating boluses based on glucose reading and carbohydrates to be consumed. The insulin pumps keep track of the time elapsed since the last insulin bolus and reduce the risk of overcorrecting and subsequent hypoglycemia. CSII therapy is appropriate for patients with type 1 diabetes who are motivated, mechanically inclined, educated about diabetes (diet, insulin action, treatment of hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia), and willing to monitor their blood glucose four to six times a day. Known complications of CSII include ketoacidosis, which can occur when insulin delivery is interrupted, and skin infections. Another disadvantage is its cost and the additional time needed by the clinician and staff to initiate therapy. Almost all patients use rapidly acting insulin analogs in their pumps. V­Go (MannKind) is a wearable patch pump designed specifically for people with type 2 diabetes who use a basal/bolus insulin regimen. The device uses rapid­acting insulin and is preset to deliver one of three fixed and flat basal rates (0.83 units/h [20 units], 1.25 units/h [30 units], or 1.67 units/h [40 units]) for 24 hours (at which point the device must be replaced). It can also deliver 2­unit increments (up to 36 units) by pressing a button, for meal coverage and high sugar correction. CeQur Simplicity (CeQur) is a 3­day wearable patch device that holds 200 units of rapid­acting insulin and delivers 2­unit increments of rapid­acting insulin by squeezing two buttons for meal coverage and high sugar correction. D. Closed­Loop Systems Algorithms have been devised to use glucose data from the CGM systems to automatically deliver insulin by CSII pump. These closed­loop systems (“artificial pancreas”) have been shown to reduce nighttime hypoglycemia and lower HbA1c levels. The MiniMed 770 G closed loop uses glucose data from a sensor to automatically adjust basal insulin doses every 5 minutes, targeting a sensor glucose level of 120 mg/dL (6.7 mmol/L). Insulin delivery is suspended when the sensor glucose level falls below or is predicted to fall below target level. The Tandem Control­IQ targets a sensor glucose level of 112.5 mg/dL (6.25 mmol/L). The Omnipod 5 targets a user­programmed glucose value between 100 and 150 mg/dL. The patient is still responsible for bolusing insulin for meals and snacks. Communities of patients with type 1 diabetes have also developed open source algorithms for smart phone that use glucose data from CGM systems to automatically adjust insulin delivery by their pumps (open artificial pancreas, open APS). One such system, called the “Loop,” uses the Dexcom G6 sensor, the iPhone, and the Omnipod insulin pump. The “Loop” controller is downloaded on to the iPhone and it uses the Dexcom G6 sensor glucose measurements (also on the iPhone) to automatically adjust basal insulin delivery on the Omnipod pump. These open APS systems have not been approved for use by the FDA. E. Inhaled Insulin A dry powder formulation of regular human insulin (technosphere insulin, Afrezza) is approved for use in adults with diabetes. It consists of 2­ to 2.5­ μm crystals of the excipient, fumaryl diketopiperazine, that provide a large surface area for adsorption of proteins like insulin. After inhalation from the small, single­use device, pharmacokinetic studies show that peak levels are reached in 12–15 minutes and decline to baseline in 3 hours, significantly faster in onset and shorter in duration than subcutaneous insulin. Pharmacodynamic studies show that median time to maximum effect with inhaled insulin is approximately 1 hour and declines to baseline by about 3 hours. In contrast, the median time to maximum effect with subcutaneous insulin lispro is about 2 hours and declines to baseline by 4 hours. In trials, inhaled insulin combined with injected basal insulin was as effective in lowering glucose as injected rapid­acting insulin combined with basal insulin. It is formulated as a single­use color coded cartridge delivering 4, 8, or 12 units immediately before the meal. The manufacturer provides a dose conversion table; patients injecting up to 4 units of rapid­ acting insulin analog should use the 4­unit cartridge. Those injecting 5–8 units should use the 8­unit cartridge. For a dose of 9–12 units of rapid­acting insulin pre­meal, one 4­unit cartridge and one 8­unit cartridge or one 12­unit cartridge should be used. The most common adverse effect of inhaled insulin was cough, affecting 27% of trial patients. A small decrease in pulmonary function (forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1]) was seen in the first 3 months of use, which persisted over 2 years of follow­up. Inhaled insulin is contraindicated in persons who smoke or those with chronic lung disease, such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Spirometry should be performed to identify potential lung disease prior to initiating therapy. During the clinical trials, there were two cases of lung cancer in patients who were taking inhaled insulin and none in the comparator­treated patients. Immunopathology of Insulin Therapy At least five molecular classes of insulin antibodies may be produced in patients during the course of insulin therapy: IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG, and IgM. There are two major types of immune disorders in these patients: li ll