of action for antineoplastics. Topoisomerase I makes a sin- gle-strand break in DNA and subsequently allows the other strand to spin, relieving any tension associated with the packing process and subsequently reseals the broken strand. Topoisomerase II makes double-strand breaks in DNA al- lowing an intact chain to pass through and then subse- quently reseals the double-strand break. In this way, it can relieve the knotting that occurs upon folding of the DNA. Both enzymes are believed to recognize sequences of DNA, bind and function by formation of a transient phosphodiester bond between the DNA strand and a tyrosine residue pres- ent on the protein. Inhibition may occur at different steps in the process such that if there is stabilization of the cleavable complex, the resealing step may be delayed or prevented re- sulting in strand breakage. This may then activate the apo- ptotic cascade. There are several natural products that are capable of dis- rupting the formation and function of the mitotic spindle. These include the epipodophyllotoxins, the taxanes, and the vinca alkaloids. The mitotic spindle forms during the M phase of the cell cycle and is responsible for moving the replicated DNA to opposite ends of the cell in preparation for cell division. During prophase, the cytoskeleton made of proteins, which gives the cell its shape, begins to breakdown providing the building blocks for the mitotic spindle. The cell then progresses to prometaphase, where the nuclear membrane begins to disappear and the spindle begins to form attaching the centrosomes to the kinetochores, which are proteins joining the two sister chromatids. Tension is then applied to the spindle so that during metaphase, the chromatids align near the center of the cell. In anaphase, a further increase in tension separates the sister chromatids at the kinetochore, and they are pulled to opposite ends of the cell. Ultimately, the microtubules will disintegrate and re- form the cytoskeleton. The process is highly controlled and there are several proteins including “motor proteins,” which are involved in coordinating the process. Actinomycins The actinomycins are a group of compounds that are iso- lated from various species of Streptomyces, all of which contain the same phenoxazone chromophore but differ in the attached peptide portion. Originally, these materials were investigated for use as antibiotics, but they proved to be too toxic. From this group emerged actinomycin D, which is known as dactinomycin and contains identical pentapeptides bound through an amide linkage utilizing the amino group of L-threonine with carbonyls at positions 1 and 9.68 The pentapeptides namely L-threonine, D-valine, L-proline, sarcosine, and L-methylvaline form a lactone via the side chain hydroxyl of L-threonine and the carboxyl group of L-methylvaline (Fig. 10.11). Dactinomycin binds noncovalently to double-stranded DNA by partial intercalation between adjacent guanine- cytosine bases resulting in inhibition of DNA function. The structural feature of dactinomycin important for its mecha- nism of cytotoxicity is the planar phenoxazone ring, which facilitates intercalation between DNA base pairs. The pep- tide loops are located within the minor groove and provide for additional interactions (Fig. 10.12). The preference for GpC base pairs is thought to be partly related to the forma- tion of a hydrogen bond between the 2-amino groups of guanine and the carbonyls of the L-threonine residues.69 Additional hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonds are proposed to form between the peptide loops and the sugars and base pairs within the minor groove. In all, acti- nomycin D spans four to five DNA base pairs (Fig. 10.12). This results in high affinity with the molecule only slowly dissociating from DNA. Additional modes of binding are also possible for the molecule. The primary effect of this interaction is the inhibition of DNA-directed RNA synthe- sis and specifically RNA polymerase. DNA synthesis may also be inhibited, and the agent is considered cell cycle spe- cific for the G1 and S phases. The drug has been found to bind to single-stranded DNA and double-stranded DNA without adjacent GpC sequences.70 It has been suggested that binding to single-stranded DNA may occur as the strands separate during transcription, and this may be re- sponsible for the inhibition of RNA polymerase.71 Those genes that were being actively transcribed, which would re- quire strand separation, would be more susceptible to this type of binding. Inhibition of topoismerase II also occurs such that the enzyme-DNA complex is stabilized and strand breakage may be seen. Resistance is caused by a decreased ability of tumor cells to take up the drug and P-glycoprotein (Pgp)-mediated efflux. 384 Wilson and Gisvold’s Textbook of Organic Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry Figure 10.11 Structure of dactinomycin. Figure 10.12 Representation of the dactinomycin– DNA complex. (Reprinted with permission from Hou, M. H., et al.: Nucleic Acids Res. 30:4910, 2002.)