CHApTEr 43 Nutrition, Digestion, & Absorption 541 cells, where they are hydrolyzed to free amino acids, which are then transported into the hepatic portal vein. Relatively large peptides may be absorbed intact, either by uptake into mucosal epithelial cells (transcellular) or by passing between epithe- lial cells (paracellular). Many such peptides are large enough to stimulate antibody formation—this is the basis of allergic reactions to foods. DIGESTION & ABSORPTION OF VITAMINS & MINERALS Vitamins and minerals are released from food during diges- tion, although this is not complete, and the availability of vitamins and minerals depends on the type of food and, espe- cially for minerals, the presence of chelating compounds. The fat-soluble vitamins are absorbed in the lipid micelles that are the result of fat digestion; water-soluble vitamins and most mineral salts are absorbed from the small intestine either by active transport or by carrier-mediated diffusion followed by binding to intracellular proteins to achieve concentrative uptake. Vitamin B12 absorption requires a specific transport protein, intrinsic factor (see Chapter 44); calcium absorption is dependent on vitamin D; zinc absorption probably requires a zinc-binding ligand secreted by the exocrine pancreas, and the absorption of iron is limited (see below). Calcium Absorption Is Dependent on Vitamin D In addition to its role in regulating calcium homeostasis, vitamin D is required for the intestinal absorption of calcium. Synthesis of the intracellular calcium-binding protein, calbindin, required for calcium absorption, is induced by vitamin D. Vitamin D also acts to recruit calcium transporters to the cell surface, so increasing calcium absorption rapidly—a process that is independent of new protein synthesis. Phytic acid (inositol hexaphosphate) in cereals binds cal- cium in the intestinal lumen, preventing its absorption. Other minerals, including zinc, are also chelated by phytate. This is mainly a problem among people who consume large amounts of unleavened whole-wheat products; yeast contains an enzyme, phytase, that dephosphorylates phytate, so rendering it inactive. High concentrations of fatty acids in the intestinal lumen, as a result of impaired fat absorption, can also reduce calcium absorption by forming insoluble calcium salts; a high intake of oxalate can sometimes cause deficiency since calcium oxalate is insoluble. Iron Absorption Is Limited and Strictly Controlled, but Enhanced by Vitamin C and Alcohol Although iron deficiency is a common problem in both devel- oped and developing countries, about 10% of the population are genetically at risk of iron overload (hemochromatosis), and in order to reduce the risk of adverse effects of nonenzymic generation of free radicals by iron salts, absorption is strictly regulated. Inorganic iron is transported into the mucosal cell by a proton-linked divalent metal ion transporter, and accu- mulated intracellularly by binding to ferritin. Iron leaves the mucosal cell via a transport protein ferroportin, but only if there is free transferrin in plasma to bind to. Once transferrin is saturated with iron, any that has accumulated in the mucosal cells is lost when the cells are shed. Expression of the fer- roportin gene (and possibly also that for the divalent metal ion transporter) is downregulated by hepcidin, a peptide secreted by the liver when body iron reserves are adequate. In response to hypoxia, anemia, or hemorrhage, the synthesis of hepcidin is reduced, leading to increased synthesis of ferroportin and increased iron absorption (Figure 43–3). As a result of this mucosal barrier, only ∼10% of dietary iron is absorbed, and only 1% to 5% from many plant foods. Inorganic iron is absorbed in the Fe2+ (reduced) state, and hence, the presence of reducing agents enhances absorp- tion. The most effective compound is vitamin C, and while intakes of 40 to 80 mg of vitamin C per day are more than adequate to meet requirements, an intake of 25 to 50 mg per meal enhances iron absorption, especially when iron salts are used to treat iron deficiency anemia. Alcohol and fructose also enhance iron absorption. Heme iron from meat is absorbed separately and is considerably more available than inorganic iron. However, the absorption of both inorganic and heme iron is impaired by calcium—a glass of milk with a meal sig- nificantly reduces iron availability. ENERGY BALANCE: OVER- & UNDERNUTRITION After the provision of water, the body’s first requirement is for metabolic fuels—fats, carbohydrates, and amino acids from proteins (see Table 16–1). Food intake in excess of energy expenditure leads to obesity, while intake less than expen- diture leads to emaciation and wasting, marasmus, and kwashiorkor. Both obesity and severe undernutrition are associated with increased mortality. The body mass index = weight (in kg)/height2 (in m) is commonly used as a way of expressing relative obesity; a desirable range is between 20 and 25. Energy requirements Are Estimated by Measurement of Energy Expenditure Energy expenditure can be determined directly by measuring heat output from the body, but is normally estimated indi- rectly from the consumption of oxygen. There is an energy expenditure of ∼20 kJ/L of oxygen consumed, regardless of whether the fuel being metabolized is carbohydrate, fat, or protein (see Table 14–1). Measurement of the ratio of the volume of carbon dioxide produced: volume of oxygen consumed (respiratory quotient, RQ) is an indication of the mixture of metabolic fuels being oxidized (see Table 14–1). Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library