12 This chapter discusses carbohydrate metabolism and its abnormalities, with emphasis on diabetes mellitus and hypoglycaemia. In the next decade it is predicted that there will be about 250 million people worldwide with type 2 diabetes mellitus. CHEMISTRY The main monosaccharide hexoses are reducing sugars. Naturally occurring polysaccharides are long-chain carbohydrates composed of glucose subunits (Table 12.1): ● Starch, found in plants, is a mixture of amylose (straight chains) and amylopectin (branched chains). ● Glycogen, found in animal tissue, is a highly branched polysaccharide. PHYSIOLOGY Functions of extracellular glucose The main function of glucose is as a major tissue energy source. The simplified pathways of glycolysis and the Krebs cycle [tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle] are shown in Figures 12.1 and 12.2. The brain is highly dependent upon the extracellular glucose concentration for its energy supply; indeed, hypoglycaemia is likely to impair cerebral function or even lead to irreversible neuronal damage. This is because the brain cannot: ● synthesize glucose, ● store glucose in significant amounts, ● metabolize substrates other than glucose and ketones – plasma ketone concentrations are usually very low and ketones are of little importance as an energy source under physiological conditions, ● extract enough glucose from the extracellular fluid (ECF) at low concentrations for its metabolic needs, because entry into brain cells is not facilitated by insulin. Normally the plasma glucose concentration remains between about 4 mmol/L and 10 mmol/L, despite the intermittent load entering the body from the diet. The maintenance of plasma glucose concentrations below about 10 mmol/L minimizes loss from the body as well as providing the optimal supply to the tissues. Renal tubular cells reabsorb almost all the glucose ﬁ ltered by the glomeruli, and urinary glucose concentration is normally too low to be detected by the usual tests, Chemistry 176 Physiology 176 Hyperglycaemia and diabetes mellitus 183 Hypoglycaemia 194 Carbohydrate metabolism Table 12.1 Common reducing and non-reducing sugars Reducing sugars Non-reducing sugars Monosaccharides Glucose Fructose Galactose Disaccharides Lactose (galactose + glucose) Sucrose (fructose + glucose) Maltose (glucose + glucose) Glucose Hexose phosphates 2-Phosphoglycerate Triose phosphates Phosphoenolpyruvate Pyruvate Lactate Figure 12.1 Simpliﬁ cation of glycolysis pathways. Reproduced with kind permission from Candlish JK and Crook M. Notes on Clinical Biochemistry. Singapore: World Scientiﬁ c Publishing, 1993.