chains tend to favor the most extended anti conformations, although some of the partially extended gauche conforma- tions also exist. Intramolecular bonding between substituent groups can make what might first appear to be an unfavor- able conformation favorable. The introduction of atoms other than carbon into a chain strongly influences the conformation of the chain (Fig. 2.14). Because of resonance contributions of forms in which a double bond occupies the central bonds of esters and amides, a planar configuration is favored in which minimal steric interference of bulky substituents occurs. Hence, an ester may exist mainly in the anti, rather than the gauche, form. For the same reason, the amide linkage is essentially planar, with the more bulky substituents oc- cupying the anti position. Therefore, ester and amide link- ages in a chain tend to hold bulky groups in a plane and to separate them as far as possible. As components of the side chains of drugs, ester and amide groups favor fully ex- tended chains and also add polar character to that segment of the chain. In some cases, dipole–dipole interactions appear to influ- ence structure in solution. Methadone may exist partially in a cyclic form in solution because of dipolar attractive forces between the basic nitrogen and carbonyl group or because of hydrogen bonding between the hydrogen on the nitrogen and the carbonyl oxygen (Fig. 2.15). In either conformation, methadone may resemble the conformationally more rigid potent analgesics including morphine, meperidine, and their analogs (see Chapter 24), and it may be this form that inter- acts with the analgesic receptor. Once the interaction between the drug and its receptor begins, a flexible drug molecule may assume a different conformation than that predicted from solution chemistry. An intramolecular hydrogen bond usually formed be- tween donor hydroxy and amino groups and acceptor oxy- gen and nitrogen atoms, might be expected to add stability to a particular conformation of a drug in solution. However, in aqueous solution, donor and acceptor groups tend to be bonded to water, and little gain in free energy would be achieved by the formation of an intramolecular hydrogen bond, particularly if unfavorable steric factors involving nonbonded interactions were introduced in the 28 Wilson and Gisvold’s Textbook of Organic Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry Figure 2.14 Effect of noncarbon atoms on a mole- cule’s configuration. Figure 2.15 Stabilization of conforma- tions by secondary bonding forces.