Some liposomes are unique because they can be selec­ tively absorbed by tissues rich in reticuloendothelial cells, such as the liver, spleen, and bone marrow. This can serve as a targeting mechanism, but it also removes liposomes from the circulation rather rapidly. To extend the half-life of liposomes in the body, "stealth liposomes" have been developed by coating the liposomes with materials, such as the polymer polyethylene glycol (PEG), enabling lipo­ somes to evade detection through the components of the body's immune system. This extends their half-life and may also alter their biodistribution. Advantages of liposomes include the following: (a) Liposome-encapsulated drugs are delivered intact to vari­ ous tissues and cells and can be released when the lipo­ some is destroyed, enabling site-specific and targeted drug delivery. (b) Liposomes can be used for both hydrophilic and lipophilic drugs without chemical modification. (c) Other tissues and cells of the body are protected from the drug until it is released by the liposomes, decreasing the drug's toxicity. (d) The size, charge, and other char­ acteristics can be altered depending on the drug and the intended use of the product. Disadvantages of liposomes include their tendency to be taken up by cells of the reticuloendothelial system (RES) and the slow release of the drug when the liposomes are taken up by phagocytes through endocytosis, fusion, surface adsorption, or lipid exchange. Many advances in liposome preparation, including composition, sizing, classification, and enhancing stabil­ ity, have been made. Stability has been a problem, but stable liposomes can now be prepared. Liposomes have been investigated for a number of years as potential drug delivery systems and now are on the market. One product is Abelcet Injection (Enzon). It is a sterile, pyrogen-free suspension for intravenous infusion consist­ ing of amphotericin B complexed with two phospholipids in a 1:1 drug-to-lipid molar ratio. The two phospholipids, L-alpha-dimyristoyl phosphatidyl choline (DMPC) and L-alpha-dimyristoyl phosphatidyl glycerol (DMPG), are present in a 7:3 molar ratio. The product is yellow and opaque with a pH in the range of 5 to 7. The formulation per milliliter is provided as the following (9): Amphotericin B, USP, 5 mg DMPC 3.4 mg DMPG 1.5 mg Sodium Chloride, USP, 9 mg Water for Injection, USP, qs 1 mL The product contains the following bolded note: NOTE: Liposomal encapsulation or incorporation in a lipid complex can substantially affect a drug's functional prop­ erties relative to those of the unencapsulated or nonlipid­ associated drug. In addition, different liposomal or lipid­ complexed products with a common active ingredient may vary from one another in the chemical composition and physical form of the lipid component. Such differences may affect functional properties of these drug products. C HAPTE R 20 Novel Dosage Forms and Drug Delivery Technologies 561 AmBisome is amphotericin B liposome for injection. It is a sterile, nonpyrogenic lyophilized product for intra­ venous infusion; each vial contains 50 mg amphotericin B intercalated into a liposomal membrane consisting of approximately 213 mg of hydrogenated soy phosphatidyl­ choline, 52 mg of cholesterol, 84 mg of distearoyl phos­ phatidylglycerol, 0.64 mg of alpha-tocopherol, 900 mg of sucrose, and 27 mg of disodium succinate hexahydrate as a buffer. When reconstituted with sterile water for injection, the pH of the solution is between 5.0 and 6.0. AmBisome is a true, single bilayer liposomal drug delivery system. When the powder is reconstituted, multiple concentric bilayer membranes are formed; these are changed by microemulsification into single bilayer liposomes using a homogenizer. AmBisome contains liposomes that are less than 100 nm in diameter. Amphotericin B is a macrocyclic polyene antifungal antibiotic that is produced from a strain of Streptomyces nodosus. Amphotec (amphotericin B cholesteryl sulfate, Sequus Pharmaceuticals) is a sterile, pyrogen-free lyophilized pow­ der for reconstitution and intravenous administration. It is a 1:1 molar ratio complex of amphotericin B and choles­ teryl sulfate that upon reconstitution forms a colloidal dis­ persion of microscopic disk-shaped particles. Each 50-mg single-dose vial contains amphotericin B 50 mg, sodium cholesteryl sulfate 26.4 mg, tromethamine 5.64 mg, diso­ dium edetate dihydrate 0.372 mg, lactose monohydrate 950 mg, and hydrochloric acid qs. The 100-mg single-dose vial contains amphotericin B, 100 mg; sodium cholesteryl sulfate, 52.8 mg; tromethamine, 11.28 mg; disodium ede­ tate dihydrate, 0.744 mg; lactose monohydrate, 1,900 mg; and hydrochloric acid, qs. Amphotec is indicated for the treatment of invasive aspergillosis in patients when renal impairment or unac­ ceptable toxicity precludes the use of amphotericin B deoxycholate in effective doses and in patients with asper­ gillosis when prior amphotericin B deoxycholate therapy has failed. The drug is reconstituted with sterile water for injection by rapidly adding the water to the vial; it is shaken gently by hand, rotating the vial until all the solids have dissolved. The fluid may be opalescent or clear. For infusion, it is fur­ ther diluted in 5% dextrose injection. The product should not be reconstituted with any fluid other than sterile water for injection; do not reconstitute with dextrose or sodium chloride solutions. Also, for further dilution, it should not be admixed with sodium chloride or electrolytes. Solutions containing benzyl alcohol or any other bacteriostatic agent should not be used, as they may cause precipitation. An inline filter should not be used, and the infusion admixture should not be mixed with other drugs. If infused using a Y-injection site or similar device, flush the line with 5% dextrose injection before and after infusion of Amphotec. After reconstitution, the drug should be refrigerated and used within 24 hours; do not freeze. If further diluted with 5% dextrose injection, it should be refrigerated and used within 24 hours (10).