538 SECTIOn Ix Special Topics (A) DIGESTION & ABSORPTION OF CARBOHYDRATES The digestion of carbohydrates is by hydrolysis to liberate oli- gosaccharides, then free mono- and disaccharides. The increase in blood glucose after a test dose of a carbohydrate compared with that after an equivalent amount of glucose (as glucose or from a reference starchy food) is known as the glycemic index. Glucose and galactose have an index of 1 (or 100%), as do lactose, maltose, isomaltose, and trehalose, which give rise to these monosaccharides on hydrolysis. Fructose and the sugar alcohols are absorbed less rapidly and have a lower glycemic index, as does sucrose. The glycemic index of starch varies between near 1 (or 100%) and near 0 as a result of vari- able rates of hydrolysis, and that of nonstarch polysaccharides (see Figure 15–13) is 0. Foods that have a low glycemic index are considered to be more beneficial since they cause less fluc- tuation in insulin secretion. Resistant starch and nonstarch polysaccharides provide substrates for bacterial fermenta- tion in the large intestine, and the resultant butyrate and other short chain fatty acids provide a significant source of fuel for intestinal enterocytes. There is evidence that butyrate also has antiproliferative activity, and so provides protection against colorectal cancer. Amylases Catalyze the Hydrolysis of Starch The hydrolysis of starch is catalyzed by salivary and pancre- atic amylases, which catalyze random hydrolysis of α(1 → 4) glycoside bonds, yielding dextrins, then a mixture of glucose, maltose, and maltotriose and small branched dextrins (from the branchpoints in amylopectin, Figure 15–12). Disaccharidases Are Brush Border Enzymes The disaccharidases, maltase, sucrase-isomaltase (a bifunc- tional enzyme catalyzing hydrolysis of sucrose and isomaltose), lactase, and trehalase are located on the brush border of the intestinal mucosal cells, where the resultant monosaccharides and those arising from the diet are absorbed. Congenital defi- ciency of lactase occurs rarely in infants, leading to lactose intolerance and failure to thrive when fed on breast milk or normal infant formula. Congenital deficiency of sucrase- isomaltase occurs among the Inuit, leading to sucrose intoler- ance, with persistent diarrhea and failure to thrive when the diet contains sucrose. In most mammals, and most human beings, lactase activ- ity begins to fall after weaning and is almost completely lost by late adolescence, leading to lactose intolerance. Lactose remains in the intestinal lumen, where it is a substrate for bacterial fermentation to lactate, resulting in abdominal dis- comfort and diarrhea after consumption of relatively large amounts. In two population groups, people of north European origin and nomadic tribes of sub-Saharan Africa and Arabia, lactase persists after weaning and into adult life. Marine mammals secrete a high-fat milk that contains no carbohydrate, and their pups lack lactase. There Are Two Separate Mechanisms for the Absorption of Monosaccharides in the Small Intestine Glucose and galactose are absorbed by a sodium-dependent process. They are carried by the same transport protein (SGLT 1) and compete with each other for intestinal absorp- tion (Figure 43–1). Other monosaccharides are absorbed by carrier-mediated diffusion. Because they are not actively transported, fructose and sugar alcohols are only absorbed down their concentration gradient, and after a moderately high intake, some may remain in the intestinal lumen, acting as a substrate for bacterial fermentation. Large intakes of fruc- tose and sugar alcohols can lead to osmotic diarrhea. DIGESTION & ABSORPTION OF LIPIDS The major lipids in the diet are triacylglycerols and, to a lesser extent, phospholipids. These are hydrophobic molecules and have to be hydrolyzed and emulsified to very small droplets Glucose Galactose Glucose Galactose Fructose Glucose SGLT 1 transporter protein Glucose Fructose Galactose To capillaries GLUT 2 Brush border Intestinal epithelium GLUT 5 ATP ADP + Pi Na+ Na+-K+ pump Na+ 3Na+ 2K+ 2K+ FIGURE 43–1 Transport of glucose, fructose, and galactose across the intestinal epithelium. The SGLT 1 transporter is coupled to the Na+-K+ pump, allowing glucose and galactose to be transported against their concentration gradients. The GLUT 5 Na+-independent facilitative transporter allows fructose, as well as glucose and galac- tose, to be transported down their concentration gradients. Exit from the cell for all sugars is via the GLUT 2 facilitative transporter. Dr.Murtadha AlShareifi e-Library