CHAPTER 5 Dosage Form Design: Biopharmaceutical and Pharmacokinetic Considerations 141 been found between two supposedly equivalent products, dissolution testing can help to define the product differ­ ences. According to the USP, significant bioavailability and bioinequivalence problems that may be revealed through dissolution testing are generally the result of one or more of the following factors: the drug's particle size, excessive amounts of a lubricant such as magnesium stearate in the formulation, coating materials, and inadequate amounts of tablet or capsule disintegrants. The FDA uses the following terms to define the type or level of equivalency between drug products (5). Pharmaceutical equivalents are drug products that contain identical amounts of the identical active drug ingredient, that is, the same salt or ester of the same thera­ peutic moiety, in identical dosage forms but not necessar­ ily containing the same inactive ingredients and that meet the identical compendia! or other applicable standard of identity, strength, quality, and purity, including potency and, where applicable, content uniformity, disintegration times, and/or dissolution rates. Pharmaceutical alternatives are drug products that con­ tain the identical therapeutic moiety or its precursor but not necessarily in the same amount or dosage form or as the same salt or ester. Each such drug product individu­ ally meets either the identical or its own compendia! or other applicable standard of identity, strength, quality, and purity, including potency and, where applicable, content uniformity, disintegration times, and/ or dissolution rates. Bioequivalent drug products are pharmaceutical equiv­ alents or pharmaceutical alternatives whose rate and extent of absorption do not show a significant difference when administered at the same molar dose of the thera­ peutic moiety under similar experimental conditions, either single dose or multiple dose. Some pharmaceutical equivalents or pharmaceutical alternatives may be equiva­ lent in the extent of their absorption but not in their rate of absorption and yet may be considered bioequivalent because such differences in the rate of absorption are intentional and are reflected in the labeling, are not essen­ tial to the attainment of effective body drug concentrations on chronic use, or are considered medically insignificant for the particular drug product studied. In addition, the term therapeutic equivalents has been used to indicate pharmaceutical equivalents that provide essentially the same therapeutic effect when administered to the same individuals in the same dosage regimens. Differences in bioavailability have been demonstrated for a number of products involving the following and other drugs: tetracycline, chloramphenicol, digoxin, warfarin sodium, diazepam, and L-dopa. Not only has bioinequiva­ lence been demonstrated to exist in products of different manufacturers; there have also been variations in the bioavailability of different batches of drug products from the same manufacturer. Variations in the bioavailability of certain drug products have resulted in some therapeutic failures in patients who took two inequivalent drug prod­ ucts in the course of their therapy. The most common experimental plan to compare the bio­ availability of two drug products is the simple crossover design study. In this method, each of the 12 to 24 individuals in the group of carefully matched subjects ( usually healthy men aged 18 to 40 years and having similar height and weight) is administered both products under fasting conditions and essentially serves as his own control. To avoid bias of the test results, each test subject is randomly assigned one of the two products for the first phase of the study. Once the first assigned product is administered, samples of blood or plasma are drawn from the subjects at predetermined times and ana­ lyzed for the active drug moiety and its metabolites as a func­ tion of time. The same procedure is then repeated (crossover) with the second product after an appropriate interval, that is, a washout period to ensure that there is no residual drug from the first administered product that would artificially inflate the test results of the second product. Afterward, the patient population data are tabulated and the parameters used to assess and compare bioavailability; that is, Cm= T max1 and AUC are analyzed with statistical procedures. Statistical differences in bioavailability parameters may not always be clinically significant in therapeutic outcomes. Inherent differences in individuals result in different patterns of drug absorption, metabolism, and excretion. These differences must be statistically analyzed to separate them from the factors of bioavailability related to the prod­ ucts themselves. The value in the crossover experiment is that each individual serves as his own control by taking each of the products. Thus, inherent differences between individuals are minimized. Absolute bioequivalency between drug products rarely if ever occurs. Such absolute equivalency would yield serum concentration-time curves for the products that would be exactly superimposable. This simply is not expected of products that are made at different times, in different batches, or indeed by different manufacturers. However, some expectations ofbioequivalency are expected of prod­ ucts considered to have equivalent merit for therapy. In most studies of bioavailability, the originally mar­ keted product ( often called the prototype, pioneer, inno­ vator, or brand-name drug product) is recognized as the established product of the drug and is used as the standard for the bioavailability comparative studies. As is recalled from Chapter 2, an applicant seeking FDA approval for the marketing of a generic version of a previ­ ously approved drug product must file an Abbreviated New Drug Application (ANDA). The application is reviewed and acted upon by FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Office of Generic Drugs. An approved generic product must be comparable to the innovator drug prod­ uct in active ingredient, strength, dosage form, intended route of administration, therapeutic indication, and man­ ufacturing and quality standards. An ANDA application must contain data from in vitro studies, which demonstrate that the proposed product is "bioequivalent" to the approved comparator product. The applicant may request the FDA to waive the requirement