Hypoglycaemia 195 Hypoglycaemia is a disease manifestation and not a diagnosis. There is no completely satisfactory classiﬁ cation of its causes. However, one useful approach is to divide hypoglycaemia into (inappropriate) hyperinsulinaemia, (appropriate) hypoinsulinaemia and reactive hypoglycaemia (Box 12.1). Hypoinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia Non-pancreatic tumours (non-islet cell tumours) Although carcinomas (especially of the liver) and sarcomas have been reported to cause hypoglycaemia, this occurs most commonly in association with retroperitoneal tumours of mesenchymal origin, but also with lymphomas, haemangiopericytomas, liver carcinoma and leukaemia. Pleural spindle cell tumours can be associated with a paraneoplastic hypoglycaemia, sometimes called Doege–Potter syndrome. Hypoglycaemia may be the presenting feature. The mechanism is not always clear, but may sometimes be due to the secretion of insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF-2) or abnormal glycosylated big IGF-2. The IGF-2 suppresses GH and IGF-1. Tumours secreting IGF-2 are characterized by an increased plasma total IGF-2:IGF-1 ratio and low plasma insulin concentration. Endocrine causes Hypoglycaemia may occur in hypothyroidism, pituitary or adrenal insufficiency. However, it is rarely the presenting manifestation of these conditions. Impaired liver function The functional reserve of the liver is so great that, despite its central role in the maintenance of plasma glucose concentrations, hypoglycaemia is a rare complication of liver disease. It may complicate very severe hepatitis, hypoxic liver disease associated with congestive cardiac failure or liver necrosis if the whole liver is affected. Plasma IGF-1 concentration may be low. Renal failure Renal failure can result in hypoglycaemia as the kidney, like the liver, is a gluconeogenic organ. Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia Insulin or other drugs are probably the most common causes. It is most important to take a careful drug history. Unless the facts are deliberately concealed by the patient, the offending drug should be easily identifiable. Hypoglycaemia in a diabetic patient may be caused by accidental insulin overdosage, by changing insulin requirements, or by failure to eat after insulin has been given. Self-administration for suicidal purposes or to gain attention is not unknown, and homicidal use is a remote possibility. Sulphonylureas or meglitinides may also induce hypoglycaemia, especially in the elderly. Hypoglycaemia due to exogenous insulin suppresses insulin and C-peptide secretion. Measurement of plasma C-peptide concentrations may help to differentiate exogenous insulin administration, when C-peptide secretion is inhibited, from endogenous insulin secretion, when plasma C-peptide is raised, whether it is from an insulinoma or following pancreatic stimulation by sulphonylurea drugs. An insulinoma is usually a small, histologically benign primary tumour of the islet cells of the pancreas. Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia Inappropriately high insulin concentrations due to: Pancreatic tumour – insulinoma Hyperplasia of the pancreatic islet cells Insulin receptor antibodies Autoimmune insulin syndrome Exogenous insulin Sulphonylureas, meglitinides Hypoinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia Endocrine Glucocorticoid deﬁ ciency/adrenal insufﬁ ciency Severe hypothyroidism Hypopituitarism Organ failure Severe liver disease End-stage renal disease Severe congestive cardiac failure Malaria (particularly if taking quinine) Some non-pancreatic islet cell tumours Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-2-secreting tumours, e.g. liver, adrenal, breast, mesenchymal, haemangiopericytomas Leukaemias, lymphomas, myeloma Widespread metastases Reactive hypoglycaemia Idiopathic Post-gastric surgery Alcohol induced Miscellaneous causes Von Gierke’s disease (type 1 glycogen storage disease) Drugs, e.g. salicylates, quinine, haloperidol, pentamidine, sulphonamides Box 12.1 Some causes of hypoglycaemia in adults