as or Biopharmaceutical and Pharmacokinetic Considerations CHAPTER AT A CLANCE Principles of Drug Absorption • Dissolution and Drug Absorption • Bioavailability and Bioequivalence • Bioequivalence of Drug Products • Routes of Drug Administration • Fate of Drug After Absorption • Pharmacokinetic Principles OBJECTIVES After reading this chapter, the student will be able to: Differentiate between passive drug diffusion and active drug transport Discuss key data points in a blood plasma concentration-time curve following the oral administra­ tion of a drug Differentiate between the terms biopharmaceutics, bioavailability, and bioequivalence Discuss the importance of a drug's dissolution rate following the oral administration of a solid dos­ age form Describe the sequence of events and the processes that occur to a drug during its course of bodily transit, from the time of its oral administration and absorption through its excretion Perform various basic pharmacokinetic calculations List the factors that a pharmacist must consider when determining a dosage regimen for a specific patient As discussed in Chapter 2, the biologic response to a drug is the result of an interaction between the drug substance and functionally important cell receptors or enzyme sys­ tems. The response is due to an alteration in the biologic processes that were present prior to the drug's adminis­ tration. The magnitude of the response is related to the concentration of the drug achieved at the site of its action. This drug concentration depends on the dosage of the drug administered, the extent of its absorption and distri­ bution to the site, and the rate and extent of its elimination from the body. The physical and chemical constitution of the drug substance-particularly its lipid solubility, degree of ionization, and molecular size-determines to a great extent its ability to carry out its biologic activity. The area of study embracing this relationship between the physical, chemical, and biologic sciences as they apply to drugs, dosage forms, and drug action has been given the descrip­ tive term biopharmaceutics. In general, for a drug to exert its biologic effect, it must be transported by the body fluids, traverse the required biologic membrane barriers, escape widespread distribu­ tion to unwanted areas, endure metabolic attack, pen­ etrate in adequate concentration to the sites of action, and interact in a specific fashion, causing an alteration of cellu­ lar function. A simplified diagram of this complex series of events between a drug's administration and its elimination is presented in Figure 5.1. The absorption, distribution, biotransformation (metabolism), and elimination of a drug from the body are dynamic processes that continue from the time a drug is taken until drug has been removed from the body entirely. The rates at which these processes occur affect the onset, intensity, and duration of the drug's activity within the body. The area of study that elucidates the time course of drug concentration in the blood and tissues is termed pharmacokinetics. It is the study of the kinetics of absorp­ tion, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME) of drugs and their corresponding pharmacologic, thera­ peutic, or toxic effects in animals and man. Furthermore, because one drug may alter the ADME of another drug, 127