Carbohydrate metabolism 192 ketones are greater than 6 mmol/L and the treatment aim is for these to be less than 0.30 mmol/L. Urinary volume should be monitored; if it fails to rise despite adequate rehydration, further ﬂ uid and potassium should be given only if clinically indicated, and then with care. The risk of deep vein thrombosis is increased, in part due to dehydration, and thus heparin 5000 U every 8 h subcutaneously can be given. Clinical conditions such as infection that may have precipitated the coma should be sought and treated. Frequent monitoring of plasma glucose, potassium and sodium concentrations is essential to assess progress and to detect developing hypoglycaemia, hypokalaemia or hypernatraemia. Acid–base balance should also be assessed. Hyperosmolal non-ketotic coma The treatment of HONK coma is similar to that of ketoacidosis. A sudden reduction of extracellular osmolality may be harmful, and it is important to give small doses of insulin to reduce plasma glucose concentrations slowly, for example 1 U/h. These patients are often very sensitive to the action of insulin. Hypo- osmolal solutions are often used to correct volume depletion, but these too should be given slowly. Heparin is usually given, as there is an increased risk of venous thrombosis. Initial investigation of a diabetic patient presenting in coma A diabetic patient may be in coma due to hyperglycaemia, hypoglycaemia or any of the causes shown in Tables 12.4 and 12.5. After a thorough clinical assessment, proceed as follows: ● Notify the laboratory that specimens are being taken and ensure that they are delivered promptly. This minimizes delays. ● Take blood immediately for estimation of: – glucose, – sodium and potassium, – urea and creatinine, – bicarbonate, – arterial blood gases. ● Do a drug screen for aspirin and paracetamol if concomitant drug overdose suspected. ● Determination of plasma lactate will help diagnose a lactic acidosis (see Chapter 4). ● Test a urine sample or blood for ketones. ● A rapid assessment of blood glucose concentration may be obtained using a point-of-care (POCT) device, but results may be dangerously wrong so these should always be checked against the results obtained from the laboratory (see Chapter 30). ● If severe hypoglycaemia is suspected on clinical grounds or because of the results obtained using reagent strips, glucose should be given immediately while waiting for the laboratory results. It is less dangerous to give glucose to a patient with hyperglycaemia than to give insulin to a patient with hypoglycaemia. ● The results of point-of-care testing (see Chapter 30) must be interpreted with caution. ● Also look for precipitating causes such as acute myocardial infarction or infection. CASE 3 A 77-year-old man with known type 2 diabetes mellitus presented to the casualty department feeling drowsy. His home blood glucose monitoring had recently averaged about 25 mmol/L and a recent glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) result obtained by his general practitioner was 12 per cent (108 mmol/mol). The following blood results were returned in hospital: Plasma Sodium 160 mmol/L (135–145) Potassium 5.0 mmol/L (3.5–5.0) Bicarbonate 21 mmol/L (24–32) Urea 15 mmol/L (2.5–7.0) Creatinine 130 µmol/L (70–110) Glucose 65 mmol/L (5.5–11.1) Osmolality 380 mmol/kg (285–295) pH 7.38 (7.35–7.45) PaCO2 5.2 kPa (4.6–6.0) PaO2 11.8 kPa (9.3–13.3) Urine was negative for ketones. DISCUSSION The patient was found to be in a hyperosmolal non- ketotic (HONK) diabetic coma. Note the severe hyperglycaemia, hypernatraemia and high plasma osmolality and presentation in an elderly patient. HONK coma is associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Ketoacidosis is usually absent, as there has been no conversion to ketone metabolism. This is more common in the elderly, and severe dehydration is present and there is an increased risk of thrombotic events and focal neurological signs. Treatment is with careful intravenous rehydration, insulin and heparin.