CHAPTER 5 Dosage Form Design: Biopharmaceutical and Pharmacokinetic Considerations 153 The unnecessary use of medications during the early stages of pregnancy is likewise restricted by physicians, because certain drugs are known to cross the placental barrier and gain entrance to the tissues and blood of the fetus. Among the many drugs known to do so are all of the anesthetic gases, many barbiturates, sulfonamides, salicy­ lates, and a number of other potent agents like quinine, meperidine, and morphine, the latter two being narcotic analgesics with great potential for addiction. In fact, it is fairly common for an infant to be born addicted because of the addiction of its mother and the passage of the drugs across the placental barrier. The kidney, as the main organ for the elimination of drugs from the body, must be functioning adequately if drugs are to be efficiently eliminated. For instance, elimi­ nation of digoxin occurs largely through the kidney by first-order kinetics; that is, the quantity of digoxin elimi­ nated at any time is proportional to the total body content. Renal excretion of digoxin is proportional to the glomeru­ lar filtration rate, which when normal results in a digoxin half-life that may range from 1.5 to 2 days. When the glo­ merular filtration rate is impaired or disrupted, however, as in an anuric patient, the elimination rate decreases. Consequently, the half-life of digoxin may be 4 to 6 days. Because of this prolongation of digoxin's half-life, the dos­ age of the drug must be decreased or the dosage interval prolonged. Otherwise, digoxin toxicity will occur. The degree of impairment can be estimated by measurements of glomerular filtration rates, most often by creatinine clearance (CrCL). Usually, however, this is not feasible, and the patient's serum creatinine value is used within appropriate pharmacokinetic equations to help determine a drug's dosage regimen. Some drugs may be reabsorbed from the renal tubule even having been sent there for excretion. Because the rate of reabsorption is proportional to the concentration of drug in un-ionized form, it is possible to modify this rate by adjusting the pH of the urine. By acidifying the urine, as with the oral administration of ammonium chloride, or by alkalinizing it, as with the administration of sodium bicarbonate, one can increase or decrease the ionization of the drug and thereby alter its prospect of being reab­ sorbed. Alkalinization of the urine has been demonstrated to enhance the urinary excretion of weak acids such as salicylates, sulfonamides, and phenobarbital. The oppo­ site effect can be achieved by acidifying the urine. Thus, the duration of a drug's stay within the body may be mark­ edly altered by changing the pH of the urine. Some foods, such as cranberry juice, can also acidify the urine and may alter drug excretion rates. The urinary excretion of drugs may also be retarded by the concurrent administration of agents capable of inhibiting their tubular secretion. A well-known example is the use of probenecid to inhibit the tubular secretion of various types of penicillin, thereby reducing the frequency of dosage administrations usually necessary to maintain adequate therapeutic blood levels of the antibiotic drug. In this particular instance, the elevation of penicillin blood levels, by whatever route the antibiotic is administered, to twofold and even fourfold levels has been demonstrated by adjuvant therapy with probenecid. The effects are com­ pletely reversible upon withdrawal of the probenecid from concomitant therapy. The fecal excretion of drugs appears to lag behind the rate of urinary excretion, partly because a day or so elapses before the feces reach the rectum. Drugs administered orally for local activity within the gastrointestinal tract and not absorbed will be eliminated completely via the feces. Unless a drug is particularly irritating to the gastrointes­ tinal tract, there is generally no urgency about removing unabsorbable drugs from the system by means other than normal defecation. Some drugs that are only partially absorbed after oral administration will naturally be partly eliminated through the rectum. I PHARMACOKINETIC PRINCIPLES This section introduces the concept of pharmacokinet­ ics and how it interrelates the various processes that take place when one administers a drug to a patient, that is, ADME. It is not intended to be comprehensive, and thus, for further information about the subject, the reader is referred to other appropriate literature. A problem encountered when one needs to determine a more accurate dosage of a drug or a more meaningful interpretation of a biologic response to a dose is the inabil­ ity to determine the drug concentration at the active site in the body. Consequently, the concept of compartmental analysis is used to determine what has become of the drug as a function of time from the moment it is administered until it is no longer in the body. Pharmacokinetic analysis uses mathematical models to simplify or simulate the dis­ position of the drug in the body. The idea is to begin with a simple model and then modify as necessary. The principal assumption is that the human body may be represented by one or more compartments or pools in which a drug resides in a dynamic state for a short time. A compart­ ment is a hypothetical space bound by an unspecified membrane across which drugs are transferred (Fig. 5.12). The transfer of drugs into and out of this compartment is indicated by arrows that point in the direction of drug Ka Drug ---► Where: CP is the drug concentration in plasma V d is the volume of the compartment or volume of distribution FIGURE 5.12. A one-compartment system.