prevented by central administration of α antagonists. Clonidine reduces sympathetic and increases parasympathetic tone, resulting in blood pressure lowering and bradycardia. The reduction in pressure is accompanied by a decrease in circulating catecholamine levels. These observations suggest that clonidine sensitizes brain stem vasomotor centers to inhibition by baroreflexes. Thus, studies of clonidine and methyldopa suggest that normal regulation of blood pressure involves central adrenergic neurons that modulate baroreceptor reflexes. Clonidine and α­methylnorepinephrine bind more tightly to α2 than to α1 adrenoceptors. As noted in Chapter 6, α2 receptors are located on presynaptic adrenergic neurons as well as some postsynaptic sites. It is possible that clonidine and α­methylnorepinephrine act in the brain to reduce norepinephrine release onto relevant receptor sites. Alternatively, these drugs may act on postsynaptic α2 adrenoceptors to inhibit activity of appropriate neurons. Finally, clonidine also binds to a nonadrenoceptor site, the imidazoline receptor, which may also mediate antihypertensive effects. Methyldopa and clonidine produce slightly different hemodynamic effects: clonidine lowers heart rate and cardiac output more than does methyldopa. This difference suggests that these two drugs do not have identical sites of action. They may act primarily on different populations of neurons in the vasomotor centers of the brain stem. Guanabenz and guanfacine are centrally active antihypertensive drugs that share the central α­adrenoceptor–stimulating effects of clonidine. They do not appear to offer any advantages over clonidine and are rarely used. METHYLDOPA Methyldopa was widely used in the past but is now used primarily for hypertension during pregnancy. It lowers blood pressure chiefly by reducing peripheral vascular resistance, with a variable reduction in heart rate and cardiac output. Most cardiovascular reflexes remain intact after administration of methyldopa, and blood pressure reduction is not markedly dependent on posture. Postural (orthostatic) hypotension sometimes occurs, particularly in volume­depleted patients. One potential advantage of methyldopa is that it causes reduction in renal vascular resistance. Pharmacokinetics & Dosage Pharmacokinetic characteristics of methyldopa are listed in Table 11–2. Methyldopa enters the brain via an aromatic amino acid transporter. The usual oral dose of methyldopa produces its maximal antihypertensive effect in 4–6 hours, and the effect can persist for up to 24 hours. Because the effect depends on accumulation and storage of a metabolite (α­methylnorepinephrine) in the vesicles of nerve endings, the action persists after the parent drug has disappeared from the circulation. Toxicity The most common undesirable effect of methyldopa is sedation, particularly at the onset of treatment. With long­term therapy, patients may complain of persistent mental lassitude and impaired mental concentration. Nightmares, mental depression, vertigo, and extrapyramidal signs may occur but are relatively infrequent. Lactation, associated with increased prolactin secretion, can occur both in men and in women treated with methyldopa. This toxicity is probably mediated by inhibition of dopaminergic mechanisms in the hypothalamus. Other important adverse effects of methyldopa are development of a positive Coombs test (occurring in 10–20% of patients undergoing therapy for longer than 12 months), which sometimes makes cross­matching blood for transfusion difficult and rarely is associated with hemolytic anemia, as well as hepatitis and drug fever. Discontinuation of the drug usually results in prompt reversal of these abnormalities.