128 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS Oral administration Gastrointestinal tract Drug ft Intravenous injection Circulatory systems Drug ft Q Intramuscular injection Subcutaneous injection Drug metabolites FIGURE 5.1. Events of absorption, metabolism, and excretion of drugs after their administration by various routes. pharmacokinetics may be applied in the study of interac­ tions between drugs. Once a drug is administered and absorption begins, the drug does not remain in a single body location but rather is distributed throughout the body until its ultimate elimi­ nation. For instance, following the oral administration of a drug and its entry into the gastrointestinal tract, a portion of the drug is absorbed into the circulatory system, from which it is distributed to the various other body fluids, tis­ sues, and organs. From these sites, the drug may return to the circulatory system and be excreted through the kidney as such or be metabolized by the liver or other cellular sites and be excreted as one or more metabolites. As demon­ strated in Figure 5.1, drugs administered by intravenous injection are introduced directly into the circulatory sys­ tem, avoiding absorption, which is required for systemic effects from all other routes of administration. The various body locations to which a drug travels may be viewed as separate compartments, each containing some fraction of the administered dose of drug. The transfer of drug from the blood to other body locations is generally a rapid and reversible process; that is, the drug may diffuse back into the circulation. The drug in the blood therefore exists in equilibrium with the drug in the other compart­ ments. However, in this equilibrium state, the concentration of the drug in the blood may be quite different (greater or lesser) than the concentration of the drug in the other com­ partments. This is due largely to the physicochemical prop­ erties of the drug and its resultant ability to leave the blood and traverse the biologic membranes. Certain drugs leave the circulatory system rapidly and completely, whereas other drugs do so slowly and with difficulty. A number of drugs become bound to blood proteins, particularly the albumins, and only a small fraction of the drug administered may actually be found outside of the circulatory system at a given time. The transfer of drug from one compartment to another is mathematically associated with a specific rate constant describing that particular transfer. Generally, the rate of transfer of a drug from one compartment to another is proportional to the concentration of the drug in the com­ partment from which it exits; the greater the concentration, the greater is the amount of drug transfer. Metabolism is the major process by which foreign sub­ stances, including drugs, are eliminated from the body. During metabolism, a drug substance may be biotrans­ formed into pharmacologically active or inactive metabo­ lites, or both. Often, both the drug substance and its metabolite or metabolites are active and exert pharmaco­ logic effects. For example, the anticonvulsant drug carba­ mazepine is metabolized in the liver to an active epoxide metabolite. In some instances, a pharmacologically inac­ tive drug ( termed a prodrug) may be administered for the known effects of its active metabolites. Dipivefrin, for example, is a pro drug of epinephrine formed by the esteri­ fication of epinephrine and pivalic acid. This enhances the lipophilic character of the drug, and as a consequence, its penetration into the anterior chamber of the eye is 17 times that of epinephrine. Within the eye, dipivefrin HCl is converted by enzymatic hydrolysis to epinephrine. Usually, the metabolism of a drug to inactive products is an irreversible process that culminates in the excretion of the drug from the body, usually via the urine. The phar­ macokineticist may calculate an elimination rate constant (K.,i) for a drug to describe its rate of elimination from the body. The term elimination refers to both metabolism and excretion. For drugs that are administered intravenously and, therefore, are not absorbed, the task is much less complex than for drugs administered by other routes. Except with intravenous administration, absorption and elimination occur simultaneously but at different rates.