152 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS Some parent compounds undergo full, partial, or no biotransformation following administration. Lisinopril (Zestril), for example, does not undergo metabolism and is excreted unchanged in the urine. On the other hand, verapamil (Calan) metabolizes to at least 12 metab­ olites, the most prevalent of which is norverapamil. Norverapamil has 20% of the cardiovascular activity of the parent compound. Diltiazem (Cardizem) is partially metabolized (about 20%) to desacetyl diltiazem, which has 10% to 20% of the coronary vasodilator activity of the parent compound. Indomethacin (Indocin) is metabolized in part to desmethyl, desbenzoyl, and des­ methyl desbenzoyl metabolites. Propoxyphene napsylate (Darvon N) is metabolized to norpropoxyphene, which has less central nervous system depressant action than the parent compound but greater local anesthetic effects. Most metabolic transformations take place in the liver, with some drugs, including diltiazem and verapamil, undergoing extensive first-pass effects. Other drugs, such as terazosin (Hytrin), undergo minimal first-pass metab­ olism. The excretion of both drug and metabolites takes place primarily but to varying degrees via the urine and feces. For example, indomethacin and its metabolites are excreted primarily ( 60%) in the urine, with the remainder in the feces, whereas terazosin and its metabolites are excreted largely (60%) through the feces and the remain­ der in the urine. Several factors influence drug metabolism. For example, there are marked differences between species in pathways of hepatic metabolism of a given drug. Species differences make it extremely difficult to extrapolate from one spe­ cies to another, as with laboratory animals to humans. Furthermore, there are many examples of interindividual variations in hepatic metabolism of drugs within one spe­ cies. Genetic factors affect the basal activity of the drug­ metabolizing enzyme systems. Thus, there can be marked intersubject variation in rates of metabolism. Because of this variation, a physician must individualize therapy to maximize the chances for a constructive therapeutic out­ come with minimal toxicity. Studies in humans have dem­ onstrated that these differences have occurred within the cytochrome P-450 genetic codes for a family of isoenzymes responsible for drug metabolism. Age of the patient is another significant factor in drug metabolism. Although pharmacokinetic calculations have not been able to develop a specific correlative relationship with age, it is known that the ability to metabolize drugs is low at the extremes of the age scale, that is, among the elderly and neonates. Liver blood flow is reduced by aging at about 1 % per year beginning around age 30 (8). This decreased blood flow to the liver reduces the capacity for hepatic drug metabolism and elimination. For example, the half-life of chlordiazepoxide increases from about 6 hours at age 20 to about 36 hours at age 80. Furthermore, an immature hepatic system disallows the effective metab­ olism of drugs by the newborn or premature infant. As mentioned earlier, the half-life oftheophylline ranges from 14 to 58 hours in the premature infant to 2.5 to 5 hours in young children aged 1 to 4 whose liver enzyme systems are mature. Diet has also been demonstrated to modify the metabo­ lism of some drugs. For example, the conversion of an asthmatic patient from a high- to a low-protein diet will increase the half-life of theophylline. It has also been demonstrated that the production of polycyclic hydro­ carbons by the charcoal broiling of beef enhances the hepatic metabolism and shortens the plasma half-life of theophylline. It is conceivable that this effect also occurs with drugs that are metabolized in similar fashion to the­ ophylline. Diet type, including starvation and intake of cer­ tain vegetables (brussels sprouts, cabbage, broccoli), has been shown to influence the metabolism of certain drugs. Coadministration of large quantities of grapefruit juice ( at least 1 quart daily) may result in increased plasma levels of some of the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors and increase the patient's risk of myopathy. Consequently, concur­ rent use of grapefruit juice should be avoided. Finally, exposure to other drugs or chemicals, such as pesticides, alcohol, and nicotine, and the presence of disease states, such as hepatitis, have all demonstrated an influence on drug metabolism and consequently the pharmacokinetic profile of certain drugs. Excretion of Drugs The excretion of drugs and their metabolites terminates their activity and presence in the body. They may be eliminated by various routes, with the kidney playing the dominant role by eliminating drugs via the urine. Drug excretion in the feces is also important, especially for drugs that are poorly absorbed and remain in the gastrointestinal tract after oral administration. Exit through the bile is sig­ nificant only when reabsorption from the gastrointestinal tract is minimal. The lungs provide the exit for many vola­ tile drugs through the expired breath. The sweat glands, saliva, and milk play only minor roles in drug elimination. However, if a drug gains access to the milk of a mother during lactation, it can easily exert its effects in the nursing infant. Drugs that do enter breast milk and may be passed on to nursing infants include theophylline, penicillin, reserpine, codeine, meperidine, barbiturates, diltiazem, and thiazide diuretics. It is generally good practice for the mother to abstain from taking medication until the infant is weaned. If she must take medication, she should abide by a dosage regimen and nursing schedule that permit her own therapy yet ensure the safety of her child. Not all drugs gain entrance into the milk; nevertheless, caution is advis­ able. A summary of drug safety in lactations, including bio­ pharmaceutic parameters, calculation of infant exposure, and a listing of drugs and their risk assessment, may be found at the following Web site: http:/ /www.medsafe.govt. nz/Profs/PUarticles/lactation.htm. Manufacturers' package inserts contain product-spe­ cific information ( usually in the section on precautions) on drug migration into breast milk.