1 58 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS renal failure, and consequently, if one can estimate the percentage decrease in excretion due to renal failure, one can use Equation 5.11 to calculate the new half-life of the drug in the patient. Thus, an adjusted dosage regi­ men can be calculated to decrease the chance of drug toxicity. Dosage Regimen Considerations The previous chapter mentions factors that can influ­ ence the dosage of a drug. It is not easy to determine how much drug and how often to administer it for a desired therapeutic effect. There are two basic approaches to the development of dosage regimens. The first is the empiri­ cal approach, which entails administration of a drug in a certain quantity, noting the therapeutic response and modifying the amount and interval of dosage accordingly. Unfortunately, experience with administration of a drug usually starts with the first patient, and eventually, a suf­ ficient number of patients receive the drug so that a fairly accurate prediction can be made. Besides the desired therapeutic effect, it is necessary to consider the occur­ rence and severity of side effects. Empirical therapy is usually employed when the drug concentration in serum or plasma does not reflect the concentration of drug at the receptor site in the body or the pharmacodynamic effect of the drug is not related ( or correlated) with drug concentra­ tion at the receptor site. Empirical therapy is used for many anticancer drugs that demonstrate effects long after they have been excreted from the body. It is difficult to relate the serum level of these drugs with the desired therapeutic effect. TABLE 5.10. Factors That Determine a Dosage Regimen ACTIVITY, TOXICITY Minimum therapeutic dose Toxic dose Therapeutic index Side effects Dose-response relationships CLINICAL FACTORS The second approach to the development of a dosage regimen is through the use of pharmacokinetics, or the kinetic approach. This approach is based on the assump­ tion that the therapeutic and toxic effects of a drug are related to the amount of drug in the body or to the plasma (or serum) concentration of drug at the receptor site. Through careful pharmacokinetic evaluation of a drug's ADME after a single dose, the levels of drug attained from multiple dosing can be estimated. One can then determine the appropriateness of a dosage regimen to achieve a desired therapeutic concentration of drug in the body and evaluate the regimen according to therapeutic response. Pharmacokinetics is but one of a number of factors that should be considered in the development of a dosage regi­ men. Table 5.10 illustrates a number of these. Certainly, an important factor is the inherent activity, that is, phar­ macodynamics and toxicity. A second consideration is the pharmacokinetics of the drug, which are influenced by the dosage form. The third factor focuses upon the patient to whom the drug will be given and encompasses the clinical state of the patient and how the patient will be managed. Finally, atypical factors may influence the dosage regi­ men. Collectively, all of these factors influence the dosage regimen. The regimen of a drug may simply involve a single dose, as with pinworm medication, or may call for multiple doses. In the latter instance, the objective of pharmaco­ kinetic dosing is to design a regimen that will continually maintain a drug's therapeutic serum or plasma concentra­ tion within the therapeutic index, that is, above the MEC but below the MTC. PHARMACOKINETICS Absorption Distribution Metabolism Excretion OTHER FACTORS Clinical State of Patient Age, weight, urine pH Condition being treated Existence of other disease states Management of Therapy Multiple drug therapy Convenience of regimen Compliance of patient Tolerance-dependence Pharmacogenetics-idiosyncrasy Drug interactions Lifestyle factors, for example, diet and recreational drug use Reprinted from Rowland M, Tozer TN. Clinical Pharmacokinetics. 3rd Ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1 995, with permission.