MELPHALAN (L-PAM, ALKERAN, L-PHENYLALANINE MUSTARD) Melphalan is available in 2-mg tablets and 50-mg vials for oral and IV administration, respectively in the treatment of multiple myeloma, breast and ovarian cancer, and in high- dose therapy when bone marrow transplant is being utilized. The mechanisms of resistance are the same as those seen for mechlorethamine. The agent is poorly absorbed when given by the oral route. Melphalan is highly plasma protein bound (80%–90%) and inactivated in the blood by water to give the hydroxy metabolites. Elimination occurs primarily in the feces with an elimination half-life of 38 to 108 minutes. The commonly seen adverse effects are myelosuppression, nausea, and vomiting. Nausea is normally mild with normal doses but becomes severe when high doses are used during bone mar- row transplant. Less commonly seen adverse effects are hy- persensitivity reactions, skin rash, and alopecia. Secondary cancers are also of concern with the use of the agent. CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE (CTX, CPM, CPA, CLAFEN, CYTOXAN, NEOSAR) Cyclophosphamide is available in 25- and 50-mg tablets for oral administration and 100-, 200-, 500-, 1,000-, and 2,000-mg vials for IV use in the treatment of a wide variety of cancers, including breast cancer, non-Hodgkin’s lym- phoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, ovarian cancer, bone and soft tissue sarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblas- toma, and Wilms tumor. Coadministration of mesna is rec- ommended. The alkylating agent is cell cycle–nonspecific, and mechanisms of resistance are similar to those seen for other alkylating agents including decreased uptake and acti- vation and increased inactivation by glutathione and oxidase enzymes (aldehyde dehydrogenase and alcohol dehydroge- nase) as well as increased DNA repair mechanisms. The agent is well absorbed when given orally. Metabolism by CYP2B6 and 3A4/5 is required for activation of the agent, and metabolites are formed as a result of this activation by subsequent reactions that are shown in Scheme 10.5. The major metabolite seen in plasma is the phosphoramide mus- tard, although there is a small amount of material (10%) arising from the dechloroethylation, which is primarily me- diated by 3A4/5. This metabolic pathway gives rise to a small amount of chloroacetaldehyde, which is both neuro- toxic and nephrotoxic. The parent compound and metabo- lites are eliminated in the urine with an elimination half-life of 4 to 6 hours. Adverse effects include dose-limiting myelosuppression, which normally presents as leucopenia. Bladder toxicity, which presents as hemorrhagic cystitis, is related to the formation of electrophilic species in the kid- ney including acrolein and may be treated by administration of mesna and increased water intake. Additionally, amenor- rhea may be seen and sterility may be permanent. Other effects include alopecia, cardiotoxicity, inappropriate secre- tion of antidiuretic hormone, and an increased risk of secondary cancers. IFOSFAMIDE (IPHOSPHAMIDE, IFO, CYFOS, IFEX, IFOSFAMIDUM) Ifosfamide is available in 1- and 3-g vials for IV administra- tion as Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved third-line therapy in the treatment of testicular cancer. It has also been utilized (although not FDA approved) in the treat- ment of a wide variety of cancers including Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, soft tissue sarcoma, germ cell tumors, small cell lung cancer, non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), cancers of the head and neck, bladder cancer, cer- vical cancer, and Ewing sarcoma. Coadministration of mesna is recommended. The mechanisms of resistance are identical to those seen with cyclophosphamide. The drug is widely distributed with a low extent of protein binding (20%). Metabolism primarily by CYP3A4/5 and CYP2B6 is required for activation of the compound (Scheme 10.7). The agent is administered as the racemic mixture as a result of the presence of the chiral phosphorus atom, and differential metabolism of the R- and S-isomers has been observed. In contrast to cyclophosphamide, there is a greater amount of deactivation of the agent by N-dechloroethylation and sub- sequently more chloroacetaldehyde is produced, which may result in a greater amount of neurotoxicity and nephrotoxic- ity than seen with cyclophosphamide. The N-dechloroethyl- ated metabolites are the predominate species seen in the plasma. The parent and metabolites are eliminated in the urine with an elimination half-life of 3 to 10 hours. The major components found in the urine are the dechlorethy- lated metabolites. Dose-limiting toxicities include myelo- suppression and bladder toxicity. Other adverse effects include nausea, alopecia, amenorrhea, inappropriate secre- tion of antidiuretic hormone, as well as the production of secondary cancers. Neurotoxicity, which is associated with the production of chloroacetaldehyde presents as confusion, seizure, weakness, and hallucination, and coma may occur. THIOTEPA (TRIETHYLENETHIOPHOSPHORAMIDE, GIROSTAN, STEPA, TESPA, THIOPLEX, TIFOSYL) Thiotepa is available in 15-mg vials for IV administration in the treatment of bladder cancer, ovarian cancer, and breast cancer. It has been used in the past in the treatment of lym- phomas such as Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma but has now mostly been replaced by other agents. The agent is widely distributed after infusion, and 40% is bound to plasma proteins. Metabolism mediated by CYP2B1 and CYP2C11 effects desulfurization to give TEPA from which aziridine may arise. Metabolites have also been identified as arising from glutathione conjugation of thiotepa followed by formation of the mercapturic acid derivative. However, the excretion profile has only accounted for a small percentage (10%–22%) of the administered dose. The elimination half- life of the compound is 2 to 3 hours. Adverse effects include dose-limiting myelosuppression and mucositis. Additionally, nausea, vomiting, skin rash, hemorrhagic cystitis, and sec- ondary cancers may occur. BUSULFAN (BUSULFEX, MYLERAN) Busulfan is available as 2-mg tablets for oral administration and 10-mL vials for IV administration in the treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) and in high-dose therapy for refractory leukemia with bone marrow transplant. The agent is well absorbed when given orally, well distrib- uted into tissues, and crosses the blood-brain barrier. Metabolism occurs in the liver as shown in Scheme 10.9 to give mainly methane sulfonic acid by the action of glu- tathione-S-transferase. Other identified metabolites in hu- mans have included tetrahydrothiophene-1-oxide, sulfalene, Chapter 10 Antineoplastic Agents 369