Carbohydrate metabolism 190 and the odour of acetone on the breath are classic features of diabetic ketoacidosis. Plasma potassium concentrations may be raised, secondarily to the metabolic acidosis, before treatment is started. This is due to failure of glucose entry into cells in the absence of insulin and because of the low glomerular ﬁ ltration rate. Despite hyperkalaemia, there is a total body deﬁ cit due to increased urinary potassium loss in the presence of an osmotic diuresis. During treatment, plasma potassium concentrations may fall as potassium re-enters cells, sometimes causing severe hypokalaemia unless potassium is prescribed. Plasma sodium concentrations may be low (hyponatraemia) or low-normal at presentation, partly because of the osmotic effect of the high extracellular glucose concentration, which draws water from the cells and dilutes the sodium. In the presence of a very high plasma glucose concentration, a normal or raised plasma sodium concentration is suggestive of signiﬁ cant water depletion. If there is severe hyperlipidaemia, the possibility of pseudohyponatraemia must be considered (see Chapter 2). When insulin is given, gluconeogenesis is inhibited, glucose enters cells and sodium-free water follows along the osmotic gradient. If plasma sodium concentrations rise rapidly, the patient may remain confused or even comatose as long as the plasma osmolality remains signiﬁ cantly raised, despite a satisfactory fall in plasma glucose concentration. This may also occur if isosmolar or stronger saline solutions are given inappropriately. Hyperphosphataemia followed by hypophosphataemia as plasma phosphate concentrations parallel those of potassium may persist for several days after recovery from diabetic coma. Similarly, hypermagnesaemia can result, partly because of the acidosis. Plasma and urinary amylase activities may be markedly elevated and, even in the presence of abdominal pain mimicking an ‘acute abdomen’, do not necessarily indicate acute pancreatitis. In some patients the amylase is of salivary rather than pancreatic origin. Some plasma creatinine assays cross-react with ketones, resulting in a spurious plasma creatinine elevation. Sometimes severe hypertriglyceridaemia and chylomicronaemia result, due to reduced lipoprotein lipase activity in the face of insulin deﬁ ciency. A summary of the usual clinical and biochemical ﬁ ndings in a patient presenting with diabetic ketoacidosis is shown in Table 12.4. Hyperosmolal non-ketotic coma In diabetic ketoacidosis there is always plasma hyperosmolality due to the hyperglycaemia, and many of the symptoms, including those of confusion and coma, are related to it. However, the term ‘hyperosmolal’ coma or ‘pre-coma’ is usually confined to a condition in which there is marked hyperglycaemia but no detectable ketoacidosis. The reason for these different presentations is not clear. It has been suggested that insulin activity is sufficient to suppress lipolysis but insufficient to suppress hepatic gluconeogenesis or to facilitate glucose transport into cells. Hyperosmolal non-ketotic (HONK) coma now may be referred to as hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state (HHS) and may be of sudden onset. It is more common in older patients. Plasma glucose concentrations may exceed 50 mmol/L. The effects of glycosuria are as described above, but hypernatraemia due to predominant water loss is more commonly found than in ketoacidosis and aggravates the plasma hyperosmolality. Cerebral cellular dehydration, which contributes to the coma, may also cause hyperventilation, and a respiratory alkalosis, although sometimes plasma lactic acid may rise, evoking a metabolic acidosis and thus a mixed acid–base disturbance may occur. There may also be an increased risk of thrombosis. Lactic acidosis Lactic acidosis can cause a high anion gap metabolic acidosis and coma. It may be due to the use of metformin in certain situations, such as high doses in Table 12.4 Clinical and biochemical ﬁ ndings in a patient presenting with diabetic ketoacidosis Findings Underlying abnormality Clinical Confusion and later coma Hyperosmolality Hyperventilation (Kussmaul’s respiration) Metabolic acidosis Signs of volume depletion Osmotic diuresis Biochemical Plasma Hyperglycaemia Insulin deﬁ ciency Low plasma bicarbonate Metabolic acidosis Initial hyperkalaemia Intracellular potassium moves out Mild uraemia Decreased glomerular ﬁ ltration rate Urine Glycosuria Insulin deﬁ ciency Ketonuria Insulin deﬁ ciency