913 Asthma | CHAPTER 79 • Systemic toxicity of ICS is minimal with low-to-moderate doses, but risk of systemic effects increases with high doses (eg, growth suppression in children, osteoporosis, cataracts, dermal thinning, easy bruising, adrenal insufficiency). Local adverse effects include dose-dependent oropharyngeal candidiasis and dysphonia, which can be reduced by using a spacer device. • Systemic corticosteroids (Table 79-4) are indicated in all patients with acute severe asthma not responding completely to initial inhaled β2-agonist administration (every 20 minutes for 3 doses) and should be administered within 1 hour of presenta- tion to reduce the risk of hospitalization. IV therapy offers no advantage over oral administration except in patients unable to take oral medications. Adults are treated effectively with 5–7 days of oral prednisone (or equivalent), but children may require only 3–5 days. Dexamethasone for 1–2 days is an option for children and has the benefit of less vomiting. Continue full doses until the PEF reaches 70% of predicted normal or personal best. Tapering the dose after discharge is unnecessary if patients are prescribed an ICS for outpatient therapy. • Adverse effects of systemic corticosteroids can occur even after a short course (<14 days). The ideal strategy is to use systemic corticosteroids in a short “burst” and then maintain the patient on appropriate long-term control therapy with ICS. Anticholinergics • Anticholinergics reverse cholinergic-mediated bronchoconstriction and are effective bronchodilators in asthma. • Ipratropium bromide is useful as adjunctive therapy in acute severe asthma not com- pletely responsive to SABA alone. Patients with persistent asthma who are intolerant to short- acting β2- agonists may be prescribed ipratropium for rescue inhaler use. • Time to reach maximum bronchodilation from aerosolized ipratropium is longer than from aerosolized SABAs (30–60 minutes vs. 5–10 minutes). However, some bronchodilation is seen within 30 seconds, and 50% of maximum response occurs within 3 minutes. Ipratropium bromide has a duration of action of 4–8 hours; tiotro- pium bromide has a duration of 24 hours. • I • Tiotropium bromide (Spiriva) and umeclidinium bromide are long -acting inhaled anticholinergics with a duration of 24 hours. Tiotropium may be considered an add- on therapy in patients whose asthma is not well controlled with a medium to high dose of ICS and LABA combination therapy. Umeclidinium bromide is available as a combination inhaler with fluticasone and vilanterol (Anoro Ellipta) but is not FDA approved for relief of acute bronchospasm or for treatment of asthma. Leukotriene Modifiers • Zafirlukast (Accolate) and montelukast (Singulair) are oral leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRA) that reduce the proinflammatory and bronchoconstriction effects of leukotriene D4. However, they are less effective than low-dose ICS, and they are less effective than LABAs when added to ICS for moderate persistent asthma. They are not used to treat acute exacerbations and must be taken on a regular basis, TABLE 79-4 Comparison of Systemic Corticosteroids Systemic Anti- Inflammatory Potency Mineralocorticoid Potency Duration of Biologic Activity (Hours) Elimination Half-Life (Hours) Hydrocortisone 1 1 8–12 1.5–2 Prednisone 4 0.8 12–36 2.5–3.5 Methylprednisolone 5 0.5 12–36 3.3 Dexamethasone 25 0 36–72 3.4–4