approximately 18,000 MW to glucagon. One of the precursor intermediates consists of a 69­amino­acid peptide called glicentin, which contains the glucagon sequence interposed between peptide extensions. Glucagon is extensively degraded in the liver and kidney as well as in plasma and at its tissue receptor sites. Its half­life in plasma is between 3 and 6 minutes, which is similar to that of insulin. Pharmacologic Effects of Glucagon The first six amino acids at the amino terminal of the glucagon molecule bind to specific Gs protein­coupled receptors on liver cells. This leads to an increase in cAMP, which facilitates catabolism of stored glycogen and increases gluconeogenesis and ketogenesis. The immediate pharmacological result of glucagon infusion is to raise blood glucose by using stored hepatic glycogen. There is no effect on skeletal muscle glycogen, presumably because of the lack of glucagon receptors on skeletal muscle. Pharmacological amounts of glucagon cause release of insulin from normal pancreatic beta cells, catecholamines from pheochromocytoma, and calcitonin from medullary carcinoma cells. Glucagon has a potent inotropic and chronotropic effect on the heart, mediated by the cAMP mechanism described above. Thus, it produces an effect very similar to that of β­adrenoceptor agonists without requiring functioning β receptors. Large doses of glucagon produce profound relaxation of the intestine. In contrast to the above effects of the peptide, this action on the intestine may be due to mechanisms other than adenylyl cyclase activation. Clinical Uses The major clinical use of glucagon is for emergency treatment of severe hypoglycemic reactions due to insulin therapy when a person is unable to self­ treat with oral glucose (eg, unconsciousness) and intravenous glucose treatment is not possible. Recombinant glucagon is currently available in a 1­mg vial for parenteral (IV, IM, or SC) use; a single­dose 0.5­mg (for pediatric patients) or 1­mg (for adults) pen or prefilled syringe for subcutaneous injection; and a 3­mg dose of a nasal powder for inhalation. The main adverse effect is transient nausea and occasional vomiting. It is therefore important to place unconscious patients on their side after administering the drug. Intravenous glucagon is commonly used in the endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography procedure to facilitate the relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi. Glucagon is sometimes used in the treatment of beta blocker overdose because of the drug’s ability to increase cAMP production in the heart independent of β­receptor function. Glucagon should not be given to patients with pheochromocytoma in whom it can cause release of catecholamines and increase blood pressure; it also should not be given to patients with insulinoma where it can cause rebound hypoglycemia. DIABETES MELLITUS Diabetes mellitus is defined as an elevated blood glucose associated with absent or inadequate pancreatic insulin secretion, with or without concurrent impairment of insulin action. The disease states underlying the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus are now classified into four categories: type 1, type 2, other specific types, and gestational diabetes mellitus. Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus The hallmark of type 1 diabetes is selective beta cell destruction and severe or absolute insulin deficiency. Type 1 diabetes is further subdivided into immune­mediated (type 1a) and idiopathic causes (type 1b). The immune form is the most common form of type 1 diabetes. Although most patients are younger than 30 years of age at the time of diagnosis, the onset can occur at any age. Type 1 diabetes is found in all ethnic groups, but the highest incidence is in people from northern Europe and from Sardinia. Susceptibility appears to involve a multifactorial genetic linkage, but only 10–15% of patients have a positive family history. Most patients with type 1 diabetes have one or more circulating antibodies, including antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 (GAD 65), insulin autoantibody, tyrosine phosphatase IA2 (ICA 512), and zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8) at the time of diagnosis. These antibodies facilitate the diagnosis of type 1a diabetes and can also be used to screen family members at risk for developing the disease. Most type 1 diabetes patients with acute symptomatic presentation have significant beta cell loss and insulin therapy is essential to control glucose levels and to prevent ketosis.