CHAPTER 5 Dosage Form Design: Biopharmaceutical and Pharmacokinetic Considerations 157 dosage schedules for a drug, such as every 4, 6, or 8 hours. Although these types of recommendations gener­ ally suit the requirements of most patients, they do not suit all patients. The most exceptional patients are those with reduced or impaired ability to metabolize or excrete drugs. These patients, most of whom have liver dysfunc­ tion or kidney disease, retain the administered drug in the blood or tissues for extended periods because of their decreased ability to eliminate the drug. The resulting extended biologic half-life of the drug generally neces­ sitates an individualized dosage regimen calling for either less frequent administration than usual or the usual dosage schedule but a decrease in the amount of drug administered. As mentioned previously, digoxin presents a good example of a drug having a half-life that is affected by the patient's pathologic condition. Digoxin is eliminated in the urine. Renal excretion of digoxin is proportional to glomerular filtration rate. In subjects with normal renal function, digoxin has a half-life of 1.5 to 2.0 days. In anuric patients (absence of urine formation), the half-life may be prolonged to 4 to 6 days. Theophylline's half-life also varies from population to population. In prema­ ture infants with immature liver enzyme systems in the cytochrome P-450 family, the half-life of theophylline ranges from 14 to 58 hours, whereas in children aged 1 to 4 whose liver enzyme systems are more mature, the theophylline half-life ranges from 2 to 5.5 hours. In adult nonsmokers, the half-life ranges from 6.1 to 12.8 hours, whereas in adult smokers, the average half-life oftheoph­ ylline is 4.3 hours. The increase in theophylline clearance from the body among smokers is believed to be because of an induction of the hepatic metabolism of theophyl­ line. The half-life of theophylline is decreased, and total body clearance is enhanced to such a degree in smok­ ers that these individuals may actually require a 50% to 100% increase in theophylline dosage to produce effec­ tive therapeutic results. The time required to normalize the effect of smoking on theophylline metabolism in the body once the patient stops smoking may range from 3 months to 2 years. Because theophylline is metabolized in the liver, the half-life of theophylline will be extended in liver disease. For example, in one study of nine patients with decompensated cirrhosis, the average theophylline half-life was 32 hours. The half-life of a drug in the bloodstream may also be affected by a change in the extent to which it is bound to blood protein or cellular components. Such a change in a drug's binding pattern may be brought about by the administration of a second drug having a greater affinity than the first drug for the same binding sites. The result is displacement of the first drug from these sites by the second drug and the sudden availability of free ( unbound) drug, which may pass from the bloodstream to other body sites, including those concerned with its elimination. Displacement of one drug from its binding sites by another is generally viewed as an undesired event, because the amount of free drug resulting is greater than the level nor­ mally achieved during single-drug therapy and may result in untoward drug effects. Concept of Clearance The three main mechanisms by which a drug is removed or cleared from the body include (a) hepatic metabolism, that is, hepatic clearance, Clh, of a drug to either an active or inactive metabolite; (b) renal excretion, that is, renal clearance, Cl" of a drug unchanged in the urine; and (c) elimination of the drug into the bile and subsequently into the intestines for excretion in feces. An alternative way to express this removal or elimination from the body is to use total body clearance (Cl8 ), which is defined as the fraction of the total volume of distribution that can be cleared per unit of time. Because most drugs undergo one or more of these processes, the total body clearance, Cl8, of a drug is the sum of these clearances, usually hepatic, Clh, and renal, Clr Clearance via the bile and feces is usually not significant for most drugs. These processes of elimination work together, so a drug that is eliminated by renal excretion and hepatic biotransformation will have an overall rate of elimina­ tion. K,,1 is the sum of the renal excretion, ku, and hepatic biotransformation, km. In the one-compartment model described earlier, total body clearance is the product of the volume of distribution, Vct, and the overall rate of elimination, K,,1: Equation 5.10 But recall that K,,1 equals 0.693/t½. If this is substituted in Equation 5.10 and the half-life, t½, solved for, the following equation is obtained: Equation 5.11 Total body clearance is a function of one or more pro­ cesses, so if a drug is eliminated from the body through hepatic biotransformation and renal clearance, Equation 5.11 becomes 0.693Vd t - ---- 112 - (Clb + Cl, ) Equation 5.12 Thus, a drug's half-life is directly proportional to the volume of distribution and inversely proportional to the total body clearance, which consists of hepatic and renal clearance. In infants and children, who exhibit larger volumes of distribution and have lower clearance values, most drugs have a longer half-life than in adults. A decrease in the hepatic or renal clearance will prolong the half-life of a drug. This typically occurs in