function (even in the absence of lowering of blood pressure). This effect is particularly valuable in diabetes, and these drugs are now recommended in diabetes even in the absence of hypertension. These benefits probably result from improved intrarenal hemodynamics, with decreased glomerular efferent arteriolar resistance and a resulting reduction of intraglomerular capillary pressure. ACE inhibitors have also proved to be extremely useful in the treatment of heart failure and as treatment after myocardial infarction, and there is evidence that ACE inhibitors reduce the incidence of diabetes in patients with high cardiovascular risk (see Chapter 13). Pharmacokinetics & Dosage Captopril’s pharmacokinetic parameters and dosing recommendations are listed in Table 11–2. Peak concentrations of enalaprilat, the active metabolite of enalapril, occur 3–4 hours after dosing with enalapril. The half­life of enalaprilat is about 11 hours. Typical doses of enalapril are 10–20 mg once or twice daily. Lisinopril has a half­life of 12 hours. Doses of 10–80 mg once daily are effective in most patients. All of the ACE inhibitors except fosinopril and moexipril are eliminated primarily by the kidneys; doses of these drugs should be reduced in patients with renal insufficiency. Toxicity Severe hypotension can occur after initial doses of any ACE inhibitor in patients who are hypovolemic as a result of diuretics, salt restriction, or gastrointestinal fluid loss. Other adverse effects common to all ACE inhibitors include acute renal failure (particularly in patients with bilateral renal artery stenosis or stenosis of the renal artery of a solitary kidney), hyperkalemia, dry cough sometimes accompanied by wheezing, and angioedema. Hyperkalemia is more likely to occur in patients with renal insufficiency or diabetes. Bradykinin and substance P seem to be responsible for the cough and angioedema seen with ACE inhibition. ACE inhibitors are contraindicated during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy because of the risk of fetal hypotension, anuria, and renal failure, sometimes associated with fetal malformations or death. Recent evidence also implicates first­trimester exposure to ACE inhibitors in increased teratogenic risk. Captopril, particularly when given in high doses to patients with renal insufficiency, may cause neutropenia or proteinuria. Minor toxic effects seen more typically include altered sense of taste, allergic skin rashes, and drug fever, which may occur in up to 10% of patients. Important drug interactions include those with potassium supplements or potassium­sparing diuretics, which can result in hyperkalemia. Nonsteroidal anti­inflammatory drugs may impair the hypotensive effects of ACE inhibitors by blocking bradykinin­mediated vasodilation, which is at least in part prostaglandin mediated. ANGIOTENSIN RECEPTOR­BLOCKING AGENTS Losartan and valsartan were the first marketed blockers of the angiotensin II type 1 (AT1) receptor. Azilsartan, candesartan, eprosartan, irbesartan, olmesartan, and telmisartan are also available. They have no effect on bradykinin metabolism and are therefore more selective blockers of angiotensin effects than ACE inhibitors. They also have the potential for more complete inhibition of angiotensin action compared with ACE inhibitors because there are enzymes other than ACE that are capable of generating angiotensin II. Angiotensin receptor blockers provide benefits similar to those of ACE inhibitors in patients with heart failure and chronic kidney disease. Losartan’s pharmacokinetic parameters are listed in Table 11–2. The adverse effects are generally similar to those described for ACE inhibitors, including the hazard of use during pregnancy. Cough and angioedema can occur but are uncommon. In the past, angiotensin receptor­blocking drugs were most commonly used in patients who had adverse reactions such as cough or angioedema with ACE inhibitors, but now many clinicians prefer to begin with angiotensin receptor blockers to avoid such adverse reactions. Combinations of ACE inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers or aliskiren, which had once been considered useful for more complete inhibition of the renin­angiotensin system, are not recommended due to toxicity demonstrated in recent clinical trials. Valsartan in combination with sacubitril (a neprilysin inhibitor) is marketed for heart failure. VASODILATORS Mechanism & Sites of Action This class of drugs includes the oral vasodilators, hydralazine and minoxidil, which are used for long­term outpatient therapy of hypertension; the parenteral vasodilators, nitroprusside and fenoldopam, which are used to treat hypertensive emergencies; the calcium channel blockers, which are used in both circumstances; and the nitrates, which are used mainly in ischemic heart disease but sometimes also in hypertensive emergencies (Table 11–3).