Reproduced with permission from Greenspan FS, Gardner DG: Basic & Clinical Endocrinology, 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2001. TABLE 41–7 Regulation of insulin release in humans. Stimulants of insulin release Humoral: Glucose, mannose, leucine, arginine, other amino acids, fatty acids (high concentrations) Hormonal: Glucagon, glucagon­like peptide 1 (7–37), glucose­dependent insulinotropic polypeptide, cholecystokinin, gastrin Neural: β­Adrenergic stimulation, vagal stimulation Drugs: Sulfonylureas, meglitinide, nateglinide, isoproterenol, acetylcholine Inhibitors of insulin release Hormonal: Somatostatin, insulin, leptin Neural: α­Sympathomimetic effect of catecholamines Drugs: Diazoxide, phenytoin, vinblastine, colchicine Efficacy & Safety of the Sulfonylureas Sulfonylureas are metabolized by the liver and, with the exception of acetohexamide, the metabolites are either weakly active or inactive. The metabolites are excreted by the kidney and, in the case of the second­generation sulfonylureas, partly excreted in the bile. Idiosyncratic reactions are rare, with skin rashes or hematologic toxicity (leukopenia, thrombocytopenia) occurring in less than 0.1% of cases. The second­generation sulfonylureas have greater affinity for their receptor compared with the first­generation agents. The correspondingly lower effective doses and plasma levels of the second­generation drugs therefore lower the risk of drug­drug interactions based on competition for plasma binding sites or hepatic enzyme action. In 1970, the University Group Diabetes Program (UGDP) in the United States reported that the number of deaths due to cardiovascular disease in patients with type 2 diabetes treated with tolbutamide was excessive compared with either insulin­treated patients or those receiving placebos. Owing to design flaws, this study and its conclusions were not generally accepted. In the United Kingdom, the United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) did not find an untoward cardiovascular effect of sulfonylurea usage in their large, long­term study. The sulfonylureas continue to be widely prescribed, and three are available in the United States. FIRST­GENERATION SULFONYLUREAS Tolbutamide is well absorbed but rapidly metabolized in the liver. Its duration of effect is relatively short (6–10 hours), with an elimination half­life of 4–5 hours, and it is best administered in divided doses (eg, 500 mg before each meal). Some patients only need one or two tablets daily. The maximum dosage is 3000 mg daily. Because of its short half­life and inactivation by the liver, it is relatively safe in the elderly and in patients with renal impairment. Chlorpropamide, tolazamide, and acetohexamide (no longer available in the US) are now rarely used in clinical practice and are not further discussed. Drug label information for tolazamide can be found at https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/. SECOND­GENERATION SULFONYLUREAS Gl b id li i id li l id d li i id i h lb id h h ld b d i h i i i i h