110 SECTION 2 | Cardiovascular Disorders ✓ Tolvaptan selectively binds to and inhibits the V2 receptor. It is an oral agent indicated for hypervolemic and euvolemic hyponatremia in patients with syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), cirrhosis, or HF. Tolvaptan is typically initiated at 15 mg orally daily and then titrated to 30 or 60 mg daily as needed to resolve hyponatremia. It is a substrate of cytochrome P450-3A4 and is contraindicated with potent inhibitors of this enzyme. The most common side effects are dry mouth, thirst, urinary frequency, constipation, and hyperglycemia. ✓ Conivaptan nonselectively inhibits both the V1A and V2 receptors. It is an IV agent indicated for hypervolemic and euvolemic hyponatremia due to a variety of causes but is not indicated for patients with ADHF. • Monitor patients closely to avoid an excessively rapid rise in serum sodium (>12 mEq/L [mmol/L] per 24 hours); fluid restrictions should be liberalized to reduce this risk. Vasodilators • Venodilators reduce preload by increasing venous capacitance, improving symptoms of pulmonary congestion in patients with high ventricular filling pressures. Arterial vasodilators counteract the peripheral vasoconstriction and impaired CO that can result from activation of the sympathetic nervous system, RAAS, and other neuro- hormonal mediators in HF. Arterial vasodilators reduce impedance, decreasing after- load and causing reflex improvement in LV performance and increased CO. Mixed vasodilators act on both arterial resistance and venous capacitance vessels, reducing congestive symptoms while increasing CO. • IV vasodilators should be considered before positive inotropic therapy in patients with low CO and elevated SVR (or elevated BP in those without a pulmonary artery catheter). However, hypotension may preclude their use in patients with preexisting low BP or SVR. • IV nitroglycerin is often preferred for preload reduction in ADHF, especially in patients with pulmonary congestion. It reduces preload and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) via functional venodilation and mild arterial vasodilation. In higher doses, nitroglycerin displays potent coronary vasodilating properties and beneficial effects on myocardial oxygen demand and supply, making it the vasodila- tor of choice for patients with severe HF and ischemic heart disease. ✓ Initiate nitroglycerin at 5–10 mcg/min (0.1 mcg/kg/min) and increase every 5–10 minutes as necessary and tolerated. Maintenance doses usually range from 35 to 200 mcg/min (0.5–3 mcg/kg/min). Hypotension and excessive decrease in PCWP are important dose-limiting side effects. Tolerance to the hemodynamic effects may develop over 12–72 hours of continuous administration. • Sodium nitroprusside is a mixed arteriovenous vasodilator that increases cardiac index (CI) to a similar degree as dobutamine and milrinone despite having no direct inotropic activity. However, nitroprusside generally produces greater decreases in PCWP, SVR, and BP. ✓ Hypotension is an important dose-limiting adverse effect of nitroprusside, and its use should be primarily reserved for patients with elevated SVR. Close monitoring is required because even modest HR increases can have adverse consequences in patients with underlying ischemic heart disease or resting tachycardia. ✓ Nitroprusside is effective in the short-term management of severe HF in a variety of settings (eg, acute MI, valvular regurgitation, after coronary bypass surgery, and ADHF). It does not usually worsen, and may improve, the balance between myo- cardial oxygen demand and supply. However, an excessive decrease in systemic arterial pressure can decrease coronary perfusion and worsen ischemia. ✓ Nitroprusside has a rapid onset and a duration of action <10 minutes, necessitating continuous IV infusions. Initiate therapy with a low dose (0.1–0.2 mcg/kg/min) to avoid excessive hypotension, and increase by small increments (0.1–0.2 mcg/kg/ min) every 5–10 minutes as tolerated. Usual effective doses range from 0.5 to 3 ALGrawany