1. Insulin allergy Insulin allergy, an immediate type hypersensitivity, is a rare condition in which local or systemic urticaria results from histamine release from tissue mast cells sensitized by anti­insulin IgE antibodies. In severe cases, anaphylaxis results. Because sensitivity is often to non­insulin protein contaminants, the human and analog insulins have markedly reduced the incidence of insulin allergy, especially local reactions. 2. Immune insulin resistance A low titer of circulating IgG anti­insulin antibodies that neutralize the action of insulin to a negligible extent develops in most insulin­treated patients. Rarely, the titer of insulin antibodies leads to insulin resistance and may be associated with other systemic autoimmune processes such as lupus erythematosus. Lipodystrophy at Injection Sites Injection of animal insulin preparations sometimes led to atrophy of subcutaneous fatty tissue at the site of injection. Since the development of human and analog insulin preparations of neutral pH, this type of immune complication is almost never seen. Injection of these newer preparations directly into the atrophic area often results in restoration of normal contours. Hypertrophy of subcutaneous fatty tissue remains a problem if insulin is injected repeatedly at the same site. However, this may be corrected by avoiding the specific injection site. MEDICATIONS FOR TREATMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES Several categories of glucose­lowering agents are available for patients with type 2 diabetes: (1) agents that bind to the sulfonylurea receptor and stimulate insulin secretion (sulfonylureas, meglitinides, D­phenylalanine derivatives); (2) agents that lower glucose levels by their actions on liver, muscle, and adipose tissue (biguanides, thiazolidinediones); (3) agents that principally slow the intestinal absorption of glucose (α­glucosidase inhibitors); (4) agents that mimic incretin effect or prolong incretin action (GLP­1 receptor agonists, glucose­dependent insulinotropic polypeptide [GIP]/GLP­1 receptor agonists, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 [DPP­4] inhibitors); (5) agents that inhibit the reabsorption of glucose in the kidney (sodium­ glucose co­transporter inhibitors [SGLTs]); and (6) agents that act by other or ill­defined mechanisms (pramlintide, bromocriptine, colesevelam). DRUGS THAT PRIMARILY STIMULATE INSULIN RELEASE BY BINDING TO THE SULFONYLUREA RECEPTOR SULFONYLUREAS Mechanism of Action The major action of sulfonylureas is to increase insulin release from the pancreas (Table 41–7). They bind to a 140­kDa high­affinity sulfonylurea receptor that is associated with a beta­cell inward rectifier ATP­sensitive potassium channel (see Figure 41–2). Binding of a sulfonylurea inhibits the efflux of potassium ions through the channel and results in depolarization. Depolarization opens a voltage­gated calcium channel and results in calcium influx and the release of preformed insulin. TABLE 41–7 Regulation of insulin release in humans. Stimulants of insulin release Humoral: Glucose, mannose, leucine, arginine, other amino acids, fatty acids (high concentrations) Hormonal: Glucagon, glucagon­like peptide 1 (7–37), glucose­dependent insulinotropic polypeptide, cholecystokinin, gastrin Neural: β­Adrenergic stimulation, vagal stimulation