GeNeRAL meThoDs AssociATeD WiTh The PhyTochemicAL iNVesTiGATioN oF heRBAL PRoDUcTs 145 17 The immense possibilities in biological research for the use of organic compounds with specific carbon atoms labelled led to the synthesis of many compounds from the inorganic carbon compounds produced in the pile by routes not before commercially utilized. In these syntheses the purity of the product is of great importance, since a small proportion of a strongly radioactive impurity might seriously jeopardize the results of any subsequent experiments. Many compounds which are most conveniently prepared from natu- ral sources (e.g. certain amino acids by the hydrolysis of proteins) are produced by growing Chlorella in an atmosphere containing 14CO2. All the carbon compounds of the organism thus become labelled, each compound possessing a uniform labelling of its carbon atoms. Many tritium (3H)-labelled compounds are commercially available. Tritium labelling is effected by catalytic exchange (platinum catalyst) in aqueous media, by irradiation of organic compounds with tritium gas and by hydrogenation of unsaturated compounds with tritium gas. Tritium is a pure β-emitter of low toxicity, half-life 12.43 years, with a radiation energy lower than that of 14C. Detection and assay of radioactively labelled compounds. When radioactive tracers are used in biogenetic studies, adequate methods for the detection and estimation of the label are essential. For the soft and easily absorbed radiation from 3H-and 14C-labelled compounds the instrument of choice is the liquid scintillation counter. It depends on the conversion of the kinetic energy of a particle into a fleeting pulse of light as the result of its penetrating a suitable luminescent substance. Rutherford successfully used this method in his early studies on radio- activity and he counted the flashes of light produced by bombardment with α-particles on a fluorescent screen prepared from zinc sulphide. The usefulness of the detector was tremendously heightened by the development of the photomultiplier tube, which replaced the human eye in recording the scintillation. Liquid scintillation media, consist- ing of a solvent in which the excitation occurs and a fluorescent solute which emits the light to actuate the photomultiplier, have also been devised for the purpose of enabling the sample to be incorporated in the same solute, and, hence, attain optimum geometry between sample and scintillator. Modern instruments are fully automatic (e.g. for 100 samples at a time) and will also measure mixed radiations such as 3H and 14C (this is possible because, although both are β-emitters, they have differ- ent radiation energies. With all counters, the instrument is connected to a suitable ratemeter which records the counts over a given time. With 14C, because of its long half-life, no decay corrections are nec- essary for normal biogenetic experiments. However the half-life is important in carbon dating of old materials. With 3H-labelled mater- ial some correction for decay may be necessary if samples are stored for any length of time. The traditional unit of radioactivity has been the curie, defined as that quantity of any radioactive nuclide in which the number of disinte- grations per second is 3.7 × 1010. Subunits are the millicurie (3.7 × 107 disintegrations per second) and the microcurie (3.7 × 104 d.p.s.). The SI unit now used for radioactive disintegration rate is the becquerel (Bq), which has a disintegration rate of 1 s−1, and its multiples include the gigabecquerel (GBq), at 109 s−1 (27.027 millicuries), and the mega- becquerel (MBq), at 106 s−1 (27.027 microcuries). For information on the theoretical basis of radioactive isotope utili- zation and the regulations governing the use of radioactive substances in universities and research establishments the reader is referred to the standard works and official publications on these subjects. Autoradiography. A technique used for the location of radioactive isotopes in biological and other material is autoradiography. In this the specimen is placed in contact with a suitable emulsion (e.g. X-ray sensitive film) and after exposure the latter is developed in the usual manner. The resulting autoradiograph gives the distribution pattern of the radioactive substances in the specimen. The method can be applied to whole morphological parts (e.g. leaves) or to histological sections, for which the resulting negative is viewed under a microscope. In a similar manner, radioactive compounds on paper and thin-layer chro- matograms can also be detected and the relative amounts of radioactiv- ity in different spots determined by density measurements or by the use of calibrated films. Precursor–product sequence. For the elucidation of biosynthetic pathways in plants by means of labelled compounds, the precursor– product sequence is commonly invoked. In this a presumed precursor of the constituent under investigation, in a labelled form, is fed to the plant and after a suitable time the constituent is isolated and purified and its radioactivity is determined. If specific atoms of the precur- sor are labelled, it may be possible to degrade the isolated metabolite and ascertain whether the distribution of radioactivity within the mol- ecule is in accordance with the hypothesis under test. Radioactivity of the isolated compound alone is not usually sufficient evidence that the particular compound fed is a direct precursor, because substances may enter the general metabolic pathways of the plant and from there become randomly distributed through a whole range of products. If this happens, degradation of the isolated constitutent and the deter- mination of the activity of the fragments would probably show that the labelling was random throughout the molecule and not indicative of a specific incorporation of the precursor. Further evidence for the nature of the biochemical incorporation of precursors arises from double- and triple-labelling experiments; either different isotopes, or specific labelling by one isotope at two or more positions in the molecules, are employed. The method has been applied extensively to the biogenesis of many plant secondary metabolites. Leete, in his classical experi- ment, used two doubly labelled lysines to determine which hydrogen of the lysine molecule was involved in the formation of the piperidine ring of anabasine in Nicotiana glauca. His feeding experiments gave the incorporations shown in Fig. 17.4, indicating the terminal N to be involved. It will be appreciated that with the above lysine precursors it is not necessary to have individual molecules labelled with both 14C and N Anabasine CH2 C H2 H2N H2N CH2 COOH N. glauca Lysine-2-14C,ε-15N N H • • CH2 CH N Anabasine CH2 C H2 H2N H2N CH2 COOH N. glauca Lysine-2-14C,α-15N N H • CH2 CH fig. 17.4 incorporation of doubly-labelled lysines into anabasine.