CHAPTER 5 Dosage Form Design: Biopharmaceutical and Pharmacokinetic Considerations 133 Effervescent, buffered aspmn tablet formulations use some of these principles to their advantage. The alka­ line adjuvants in the tablet enhance the solubility of the aspirin within the diffusional layer, and the evolution of carbon dioxide agitates the solvent system, that is, gastric juices. Consequently, the rate of absorption of aspirin into the bloodstream is faster than from a conventional aspirin tablet formulation. If this dosage form is acceptable to the patient, it provides a quicker means for the patient to gain relief from a troublesome headache. Many manufacturers use a particular amorphous, crystalline, salt, or ester form of a drug that will exhibit the solubility characteristics needed to achieve the desired dissolution characteristics. Some of these factors that affect drug dissolution briefly are discussed in the following paragraphs, whereas others will be discussed in succeeding chapters in which they are relevant. The chemical and physical characteristics of a drug substance that can affect safety, efficacy, and stability must be carefully defined by appropriate standards in an application for U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval and then sustained and controlled throughout product manufacture. Surface Area When a drug particle is broken up, the total surface area is increased. For drug substances that are poorly or slowly soluble, this generally results in an increase in the rate of dissolution. This is explained in Physical Pharmacy Capsule 5.1, Particle Size, Surface Area, and Dissolution Rate. Increased therapeutic response to orally administered drugs due to smaller particle size has been reported for a number of drugs, among them theophylline, a xanthine derivative used to treat bronchial asthma; griseofulvin, an antibiotic with antifungal activity; sulfisoxazole, an anti­ infective sulfonamide; and nitrofurantoin, a urinary anti­ infective drug. To increase surface area, pharmaceutical manufacturers frequently use micronized powders in their solid products. Although not officially defined, micronized powders generally consist of drug particles reduced in size to about 5 mm and smaller. A slight variation on this is accomplished by blending and melting poorly water­ soluble powders with a water-soluble polymer, such as polyethylene glycol (PEG). In the molten state and if the drug dissolves in the carrier, a molecular dispersion of the drug in the carrier results. Solidification produces a solid particle size has an effect on dissolution rate and solubility. As shown in the Noyes-Whitney equation, dC dT = kS(Cs - Ct) where dOdT is the rate of dissolution (concentration with respect to time); k is the dissolution rate constant; S is the surface area of the particles; C, is the concentration of the drug in the immediate proximity of the dissolving particle, that is, the solubility of the drug; and C, is the concentration of the drug in the bulk fluid. It is evident that C, cannot be significantly changed, C, is often under sink conditions (an amount of the drug is used that is <20% of its solubility), and k comprises many factors, such as agitation and temperature. This leaves the S, surface area, as a factor that can affect the rate of dissolution. An increase in the surface area of a drug will, within reason, increase the dissolution rate. Circumstances in which it may decrease the rate include a decrease in the effective surface area, that is, a condition in which the dissolving fluid cannot wet the particles. Wetting is the first step in dissolution. This can be demonstrated by visual­ izing a tablet of diameter 0.75 inch by thickness 0.25 inch. The surface area of the tablet can be increased by drilling a series of 0.0625-inch holes in the tablet. However, even though the surface area has been increased, the dissolu­ tion fluid-water-because of surface tension and so on cannot necessarily penetrate the new holes and displace the air. Adsorbed air and other factors can decrease the effective surface area of a dosage form, including powders. This is the reason that particle size reduction does not always raise the dissolution rate. One can also visualize a powder that has been com minuted to a very fine state of subdivision; when it is placed in a beaker of water, the powder floats because of the entrapped and adsorbed air. The effective surface area is not the same as the actual surface area of the powder. ■