105 Heart Failure | CHAPTER 9 • Dapagliflozin and empagliflozin reduce the risk of worsening HF and cardiovascu- lar death in patients with HFrEF (with or without diabetes) and are FDA-approved for this use. • Patients should be advised to weigh daily and contact their healthcare provider if their weight starts to decline and to avoid abrupt changes in position as orthostasis may occur in the setting of overdiuresis. Diuretics • Compensatory mechanisms in HF stimulate excessive sodium and water retention, often leading to systemic and pulmonary congestion. Consequently, diuretic therapy (in addition to sodium restriction) is recommended for all patients with clinical evidence of fluid retention. However, because they do not alter disease progression or prolong survival, diuretics are not required for patients without fluid retention. • Thiazide diuretics (eg, hydrochlorothiazide) are relatively weak and are infrequently used alone in HF. However, thiazides or the thiazide-like diuretic metolazone can be used in combination with a loop diuretic to promote very effective diuresis. Thiazides may be preferred over loop diuretics in patients with only mild fluid retention and elevated BP because of their more persistent antihypertensive effects. • Loop diuretics (furosemide, bumetanide, and torsemide) are usually necessary to restore and maintain euvolemia in HF. In addition to acting in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle, they induce a prostaglandin-mediated increase in renal blood flow that contributes to their natriuretic effect. Unlike thiazides, loop diuret- ics maintain their effectiveness in the presence of impaired renal function, although higher doses may be necessary. • Adverse effects of diuretics include hypovolemia, hypotension, hyponatremia, hypo- kalemia, hypomagnesemia, hyperuricemia, and renal dysfunction. Nitrates and Hydralazine • Isosorbide dinitrate (ISDN) is a venodilator that reduces preload, whereas hydralazine is a direct arterial vasodilator that reduces systemic vascular resis- tance (SVR) and increases stroke volume and CO. The beneficial effects of combin- ing a nitrate with hydralazine extend beyond their complementary hemodynamic actions and are likely related to attenuating the biochemical processes driving HF progression. • Guidelines recommend adding hydralazine/ISDN to Black patients with HFrEF and persistent symptoms despite ARNI, β- blocker, aldosterone antagonist, and SGLT2 inhibitor therapy. The combination can also be useful in patients unable to tolerate either an ACE inhibitor or ARB because of renal insufficiency, hyperkalemia, or hypotension. • Obstacles to successful therapy with the combination include the need for frequent dosing (ie, three times daily with the fixed-dose combination product), high fre- quency of adverse effects (eg, headache, dizziness, and GI distress), and increased cost for the fixed-dose combination product. • In patients with HFpEF, nitrates reduce exercise capacity and do not improve quality of life or plasma NT proBNP concentrations. Adverse events, including worsening HF and presyncope/syncope, are more frequent with nitrate treatment. In the absence of another indication for nitrate therapy (eg, angina), nitrates provide no benefits to patients with HFpEF. Ivabradine • Ivabradine inhibits the If current in the sinoatrial node that is responsible for con- trolling HR, thereby slowing spontaneous depolarization of the sinus node and resulting in a dose-dependent slowing of the HR. It does not affect AV conduction, BP, or myocardial contractility. Elevated resting heart rate (HR) (>70–80 bpm) is an independent risk factor for adverse HFrEF outcomes, and β-blockers are frequently underdosed in clinical practice for a variety of reasons. Because of the clear benefits