Carbohydrate metabolism 186 Metabolic features of diabetes mellitus Patients with type 1 diabetes tend to be diagnosed before the age of 40 years, are usually lean and have experienced weight loss at the time of presentation. They may present with diabetic ketoacidosis. Conversely, patients with type 2 diabetes often present later, usually after the age of 40 years, and are often overweight or obese. The presentation can be insidious and they may have had diabetes years before diagnosis. Hyperglycaemia If plasma glucose concentration exceeds about 10 mmol/L, glycosuria would be expected. High urinary glucose concentrations produce an osmotic diuresis and therefore polyuria. Cerebral cellular dehydration due to hyperosmolality, secondary to hyperglycaemia, causes thirst (polydipsia). A prolonged osmotic diuresis may cause excessive urinary electrolyte loss. These ‘classic’ symptoms are suggestive of diabetes mellitus. Diabetic patients on insulin may show the following conditions. The ‘dawn’ phenomenon is the physiological response of the elevation of blood glucose concentration in the early morning prior to breakfast due to nocturnal spikes in GH concentration and a rise in plasma cortisol concentration that increase hepatic gluconeogenesis. Conversely, in some diabetic patients nocturnal hypoglycaemia may evoke a rebound counter-regulatory hyperglycaemia called the Somogyi phenomenon. Patient blood glucose checking at 02.00– 04.00 h, or continuous glucose monitoring if available, may distinguish these conditions, as the Somogyi phenomenon reveals hypoglycaemia. It is sometimes possible to ameliorate these conditions by giving intermediate-acting insulin before bedtime. Abnormalities in lipid metabolism These may be secondary to insulin deficiency. Lipolysis is enhanced and plasma NEFA concentrations rise. In the liver, NEFAs are converted to acetyl CoA and ketones, or are re-esterified to form endogenous triglycerides and incorporated into VLDLs; the latter accumulate in plasma because lipoprotein lipase, which is necessary for VLDL catabolism, requires insulin for optimal activity. High-density lipoprotein cholesterol concentration tends to be low in type 2 diabetes. If insulin deficiency is very severe, there may also be chylomicronaemia. The rate of cholesterol synthesis is also increased, with an associated increase in plasma LDL concentrations. Consequently, patients with diabetes may show high plasma triglyceride, raised cholesterol and low HDL cholesterol concentrations. Long-term effects of diabetes mellitus Vascular disease is a common complication of diabetes mellitus. Macrovascular disease due to abnormalities of large vessels may present as coronary artery, cerebrovascular or peripheral vascular insufficiency. The condition is probably related to alterations in lipid metabolism and associated hypertension. The most common cause of death is cardiovascular disease, including myocardial infarction. Microvascular disease due to abnormalities of small blood vessels particularly affects the retina (diabetic retinopathy) and the kidney (nephropathy); both may be related to inadequate glucose control. Diabetes is one of the most common causes of patients requiring renal dialysis. Microvascular disease of the kidney is associated with proteinuria. Kidney disease is associated with several abnormalities, including proteinuria and progressive renal failure. Diffuse nodular glomerulosclerosis (Kimmelstiel–Wilson lesions) may cause the nephrotic syndrome. The presence of small amounts of albumin in the urine (microalbuminuria) is associated with an increased risk of developing progressive renal disease, which may sometimes be prevented by more stringent plasma glucose and blood pressure control. The renal complications may be partly due to the increased glycation of structural proteins in the arterial walls supplying the glomerular basement membrane; similar vascular changes in the retina may account for the high incidence of diabetic retinopathy. Glycation of protein in the lens may cause cataracts. Infections are also more common in diabetic patients, for example urinary tract or chest infections, cellulitis and candida. Diabetic neuropathy can occur, which can be peripheral symmetric sensory, peripheral painful, acute mononeuropathies or autonomic. It has been suggested that sorbitol is implicated in the aetiology of diabetic neuropathy through the action of aldolase reductase. Erectile dysfunction is also relatively common and in some cases may be partly neurologically mediated. Diabetic ulcers, for example of the feet, can lead to gangrene and amputation. The ulcers can be ischaemic, neuropathic or infective. The joints can also be affected, for example Charcot’s joints. Other features of diabetes mellitus are skin disorders, such as necrobiosis lipoidica, and abscesses. Principles of management of diabetes mellitus The management of diabetes mellitus is considered briefly, although consulting a specialist text is