568 ANSEL'S PHARMACEUTICAL DOSAGE FORMS AND DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS ...Byetta· mcg - 5 FIGURE :Z0.16. Exenatide 250 mg/ml; 1 .2-ml prefilled pen injection. Each prefilled pen will deliver 60 subcutaneous doses at 5 mg/dose. pushing on the plunger rod. The protective sleeve auto­ matically covers the needle, and an audible click is heard to confirm that the shield has been activated and covers the needle. The syringe/needle is then safely disposed of in the nearest sharps container. Microneedle Arrays Microneedle arrays are promising devices for the delivery of drugs and vaccines into or the skin. Unique microneedle arrays can be prepared from various materials and can be either solid or hollow. They rapidly take up skin interstitial fluid upon skin insertion to form continuous, unblock­ able, conduits from attached patch-type drug reservoirs to the dermal microcirculation. Microneedles that can be fabricated in a wide range of patch sizes and microneedle geometries can be easily sterilized, resist hole closure while in place, and are removed completely intact from the skin. Delivery of macromolecules is no longer limited to what can be loaded into the microneedles themselves, and transdermal drug delivery can now be controlled by the cross-link density of the hydrogel system rather than the stratum corneum. This technology has the potential to overcome the limitations of conventional microneedle designs and to greatly increase the range of the type of drug that is deliverable transdermally, with ensuing ben­ efits for industry, health care providers, and, ultimately, patients. However, little is known aboutthe safety of the micro nee­ dles. One study reported on the ability of micro needles to disrupt the skin barrier, which was evaluated by transepi­ dermal water loss (TEWL). The study also determined the safety in terms of skin irritation (skin redness and blood flow) and pain sensation. The microneedle arrays used in the study are able to overcome the barrier function of the skin in human volunteers, are painless, and cause only minimal irritation. This opens the opportunity for dermal and transdermal delivery of drugs and vaccines. Needle-free delivery has the potential to enhance parenteral administration efficacy and safety, as well as facilitate cost-effective global vaccine distribution and storage, especially for vaccines. To this end, microneedle arrays provide the ability for pain-free, safe, and conve­ nient materials delivery through disruption of the outer layers of the skin to access potent immunocompetent cell populations residing within the epidermal/ dermal tissues. These systems also have the capability of two-way activi­ ties: drug delivery and sensing capabilities potentially to monitor and adjust drug delivery (27). I 3D PRINTING SPRITAM (levetiracetam), the first drug using 3D tech­ nology, has been approved by the FDA. SPRITAM uses ZipDose technology, which combines formulation science with the unique manufacturing capabilities of 3-dimen­ sional printing (3DP). Using 3DP technology, Aprecia is developing formulations of medicines that rapidly disinte­ grate with a sip of liquid, even at high-dose loads. The 3D printing technology involves the following steps: • A powder blend is deposited as a single layer. • The binding fluid is applied to bind the particles. • This process is repeated several times to manufacture orodispersible dosage forms. This produces a porous formulation that rapidly disintegrates with a sip of liquid. SPRITAM (levetiracetam) is for oral use as a prescrip­ tion adjunctive therapy in the treatment of partial-onset seizures, myoclonic seizures, and primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures in adults and children with epilepsy and marks the first time a drug product manufactured with this technology has been approved by the FDA. SPRITAM is an antiepileptic drug available as 250-, 500-, 750-, and 1,000-mg round, white to off-white, spearmint-flavored tablets for oral suspension. Levetiracetam is a white to off­ white crystalline powder with a faint odor and a bitter taste and is very soluble in water. SPRITAM tablets for oral suspension contain 250, 500, 750, or 1,000 mg levetiracetam and the following inactive ingredients: colloidal silicon dioxide, glycerin, manni­ tol, microcrystalline cellulose, polysorbate 20, povidone, sucralose, butylated hydroxyanisole, and natural and arti­ ficial spearmint flavor. The tablets for oral suspension are unitary porous structures produced by a three-dimen­ sional printing process that binds the powders without compression; they disintegrate in a mean time of 11 sec­ onds (ranging from 2 to 27 seconds) in the mouth, when taken with a sip of liquid, to produce small particles that may be swallowed (28).